Thank you.  To all of you, and to everybody who helped put this together, thank you so much. I am very grateful.

I'm going to be very brief at the top, because I want to -- usually in these things I like to spend most of my time in a conversation. I do want to acknowledge that I have as good a Cabinet as I think any President in modern history has had. And one of the stars of that Cabinet is sitting right here, Kathleen Sebelius. 

All of America has gone through an incredibly difficult, wrenching time these last three years. And it doesn't matter whether you are black or white, whether you are Northern or Southern, rich or poor, gay or straight; I think all of us have been deeply concerned over these last three years to making sure that our economy recovers, that we're putting people back to work, that we stabilize the financial system. The amount of hardship and challenge that ordinary families have gone through over the last three years has been incredible. And there are still a lot of folks hurting out there.

The good news is that we're moving in the right direction. And when I came into office, we were losing 750,000 jobs a month, and this past month we gained 250,000 -- that's a million job swing.  And for the last 23 months, we've now created 3.7 million jobs. And that's more than any time since 2000 -- or, yes, since, 2005 -- the number of jobs that we created last year, and more manufacturing jobs than any time since the 1990s.

So we're making progress on that front now, but we've still got a long way to go. Today, we announced a housing settlement, brought about by our Attorney General and states attorneys all across the country. And as a consequence, we're going to see billions of dollars in loan modifications and help to folks who are seeing their homes underwater. And that's going to have a huge impact.

In my State of the Union, we talked about the need for American manufacturing -- companies coming back, insourcing, and recognizing how incredibly productive American workers are; and our need to continue to double down on investments in clean energy; and making sure that our kids are getting trained so that they are competing with any workers in the world, and are also effectively equipped to be great citizens and to understand the world around them.

And we talked about the fact that we've got to have the same set of values of fair play and responsibility for everybody -- whether it's Wall Street or Main Street. It means that we have a Consumer Finance Protection Board that is enforcing rules that make sure that nobody is getting abused by predatory lending or credit card scams. It means that we have regulations in place that protect our air and our water.

And it also means that we ensure that everybody in our society has a fair shot, is treated fairly. That's at the heart of the American Dream. For all the other stuff going on, one thing every American understands is you should be treated fairly; you should be judged on the merits. If you work hard, if you do a good job, if you're responsible in your community, if you're looking after you family, if you're caring for other people, then that's how you should be judged. Not by what you look like, not by how you worship, not by where you come from, not by who you love.

And so the work that we've done with respect to the LGBT community I think is just profoundly American and is at the heart of who we are.  And that's why I could not be prouder of the track record that we've done, starting with the very beginning when we started to change, through executive order, some of the federal policies. Kathleen -- the work that she did making sure that hospital visitation was applied equally to same-sex couples, just like with anybody else's loved ones. The changes we made at the State Department. The changes we made in terms of our own personnel policies. But also some very high-profile work, like "don't ask, don't tell."

And what's been striking over the course of these last three years is because we've rooted this work in this concept of fairness, and we haven't gone out of our way to grab credit for it, we haven't gone out of our way to call other folks names if they didn't always agree with us on stuff, but we just kept plodding along -- because of that, in some ways what's been remarkable is how readily the public recognizes this is the right thing to do.

Think about -- just take "don't ask, don't tell" as an example. The perception was somehow that this would be this huge, ugly issue. But because we did it methodically, because we brought the Pentagon in, because we got some very heroic support from people like Bob Gates and Mike Mullen, and they thought through institutionally how to do it effectively -- since it happened, nothing's happened.  Nothing's happened.

We still have the best military by far on Earth. There hasn't been any notion of erosion and unit cohesion. It turns out that people just want to know, are you a good soldier, are you a good sailor, are you a good airman, are you a good Marine, good Coast Guardsman. That's what they're concerned about. Do you do your job? Do you do your job well?

It was striking -- when I was in Hawaii, there is a Marine base close to where we stay. Probably the nicest piece of real estate I think the Marines have.  They're lifting 100-pound dumb bells and all this stuff. At least three times that I was at that gym, people came up, very quietly, to say, you know what, thank you for ending "don't ask, don't tell."

Now, here's the thing. I didn't even know whether they were gay or lesbian. I didn't ask -- because that wasn't the point. The point was these were outstanding Marines who appreciated the fact that everybody was going to be treated fairly.

We're going to have more work to do on this issue, as is true on a lot of other issues. There's still areas where fairness is not the rule. And we're going to have to keep on pushing in the same way -- persistently, politely, listening to folks who don't always agree with us, but sticking to our guns in terms of what our values are all about. What American values are all about.

And that's going to be true on the issues that are of importance to the LGBT community specifically, but it's also going to be true on a host of other issues where we're just going to have to make persistent steady progress. Whether it is having an energy policy that works for America; whether it is having an immigration policy that is rational so that we are actually both a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants; whether it's making sure that as we get our fiscal house in order we do it in a balanced way where everybody is doing their fair share to help close this deficit. It's not just being done on the backs of people who don't have enough political clout on Capitol Hill, but it's broadly applied and everybody is doing their fair share.

On all these issues, my view is that if we go back to first principles and we ask ourselves, what does it mean for us as Americans to live in a society where everybody has a fair shot, everybody is doing their fair share, we're playing by a fair set of rules, everybody is engaging in fair play -- then we're going to keep on making progress.

And that's where I think the American people are at. It doesn't mean this is going to be smooth. It doesn't mean that there aren't going to be bumps in the road. It's not always good politics -- sometimes it's not. But over the long term, the trajectory of who we are as a nation, I believe that's our national character. We trend towards fairness and treating people well. And as long as we keep that in mind, I think we should be optimistic not just about the next election, but about the future of this country.

Thank you. 

Thank you so much. 

Now, this weekend at the G-8, we'll be represented by many of the world's largest economies. We face urgent challenges -- creating jobs, addressing the situation in the eurozone, sustaining the global economic recovery. But even as we deal with these issues, I felt it was also important, also critical to focus on the urgent challenge that confronts some 1 billion men, women and children around the world -- the injustice of chronic hunger; the need for long-term food security.

So tomorrow at the G-8, we're going to devote a special session to this challenge. We're launching a major new partnership to reduce hunger and lift tens of millions of people from poverty. And we'll be joined by leaders from across Africa, including the first three nations to undertake this effort and who join us here today -- I want to acknowledge them: Prime Minister Meles of Ethiopia --  Welcome.

I also want to acknowledge President Yayi of Benin, chair of the African Union -- 

Now, this partnership is possible because so many leaders in Africa and around the world have made food security a priority. And that's why, shortly after I took office, I called for the international community to do its part. And at the G-8 meeting three years ago in L'Aquila, in Italy, that's exactly what we did -- mobilizing more than $22 billion for a global food security initiative.

After decades in which agriculture and nutrition didn't always get the attention they deserved, we put the fight against global hunger where it should be, which is at the forefront of global development. And this reflected the new approach to development that I called for when I visited Ghana, hosted by President Mills, and that I unveiled at the last summit on the Millennium Development goals.

It's rooted in our conviction that true development involves not only delivering aid, but also promoting economic growth -- broad- based, inclusive growth that actually helps nations develop and lifts people out of poverty. The whole purpose of development is to create the conditions where assistance is no longer needed, where people have the dignity and the pride of being self-sufficient. You see our new approach in our promotion of trade and investment, of building on the outstanding work of the African Growth and Opportunity Act. You see it in the global partnership to promote open government, which empowers citizens and helps to fuel development, creates the framework, the foundation for economic growth.

You see it in the international effort we're leading against corruption, including greater transparency so taxpayers receive every dollar they're due from the extraction of natural resources. You see it in our Global Health Initiative, which instead of just delivering medicine is also helping to build a stronger health system, delivering better care and saving lives.

And you see our new approach in our food security initiative, Feed the Future. Instead of simply handing out food, we've partnered with countries in pursuit of ambitious goals: better nutrition to prevent the stunting and the death of millions of children, and raising the incomes of millions of people, most of them farmers. The good news is we're on track to meet our goals.

As President, I consider this a moral imperative. As the wealthiest nation on Earth, I believe the United States has a moral obligation to lead the fight against hunger and malnutrition, and to partner with others.

So we take pride in the fact that, because of smart investments in nutrition and agriculture and safety nets, millions of people in Kenya and Ethiopia did not need emergency aid in the recent drought.

But when tens of thousands of children die from the agony of starvation, as in Somalia, that sends us a message we've still got a lot of work to do. It's unacceptable. It's an outrage. It's an affront to who we are.

So food security is a moral imperative, but it's also an economic imperative. History teaches us that one of the most effective ways to pull people and entire nations out of poverty is to invest in their agriculture. And as we've seen from Latin America to Africa to Asia, a growing middle class also means growing markets, including more customers for American exports that support American jobs. So we have a self interest in this.

It's a moral imperative, it's an economic imperative, and it is a security imperative. For we've seen how spikes in food prices can plunge millions into poverty, which, in turn, can spark riots that cost lives, and can lead to instability. And this danger will only grow if a surging global population isn't matched by surging food production. So reducing malnutrition and hunger around the world advances international peace and security -- and that includes the national security of the United States.

And perhaps nowhere do we see this link more vividly than in Africa. On the one hand, we see Africa as an emerging market. African economies are some of the fastest growing in the world. We see a surge in foreign investment. We see a growing middle class; hundreds of millions of people connected by mobile phones; more young Africans online than ever before. There's hope and some optimism. And all of this has yielded impressive progress -- for the first time ever, a decline in extreme poverty in Africa; an increase in crop yields; a dramatic drop in child deaths. That's the good news, and in part it's due to some of the work of the people in this room.

On the other hand, we see an Africa that still faces huge hurdles: stark inequalities; most Africans still living on less than $2 a day; climate change that increases the risk of drought and famine. All of which perpetuates stubborn barriers in agriculture, in the agricultural sector -- from bottlenecks in infrastructure that prevent food from getting to market, to the lack of credit, especially for small farmers, most of whom are women.

I've spoken before about relatives I have in Kenya, who live in villages where hunger is sometimes a reality -- despite the fact that African farmers can be some of the hardest-working people on Earth. Most of the world's unused arable land is in Africa. Fifty years ago, Africa was an exporter of food. There is no reason why Africa should not be feeding itself and exporting food again. There is no reason for that. 

So that's why we're here. In Africa and around the world, progress isn't coming fast enough. And economic growth can't just be for the lucky few at the top, it's got to be broad-based, for everybody, and a good place to start is in the agricultural sector. So even as the world responds with food aid in a crisis -- as we've done in the Horn of Africa -- communities can't go back just to the way things were, vulnerable as before, waiting for the next crisis to happen. Development has to be sustainable, and as an international community, we have to do better.

So here at the G-8, we're going to build on the progress we've made so far. Today, I can announce a new global effort we're calling a New Alliance for Food Security and Nutrition. And to get the job done we're bringing together all the key players around a shared commitment. Let me describe it.

Governments, like those in Africa, that are committed to agricultural development and food security, they agree to take the lead -- building on their own plans by making tough reforms and attracting investment. Donor countries -- including G-8 members and international organizations -- agree to more closely align our assistance with these country plans. And the private sector -- from large multinationals to small African cooperatives, your NGOs and civil society groups -- agree to make concrete and continuing commitments as well, so that there is an alignment between all these sectors.

Now, I know some have asked, in a time of austerity, whether this New Alliance is just a way for governments to shift the burden onto somebody else. I want to be clear: The answer is no. As President, I can assure you that the United States will continue to meet our responsibilities, so that even in these tough fiscal times, we will continue to make historic investments in development. And, by the way, we're going to be working to end hunger right here in the United States as well.  That will continue to be a priority.

We'll continue to be the leader in times of crisis, as we've done as the single largest donor of aid in the Horn of Africa, and as we focus on the drought in the Sahel. That's why I've proposed to continue increasing funds for food security.  So I want to be clear: The United States will remain a global leader in development in partnership with you. And we will continue to make available food -- or emergency aid. That will not change. But what we do want to partner with you on is a strategy so that emergency aid becomes less and less relevant as a consequence of greater and greater sustainability within these own countries.

That's how development is supposed to work. That's what I mean by a new approach that challenges more nations, more organizations, more companies, more NGOs, challenges individuals -- some of the young people who are here -- to step up and play a role -- because government cannot and should not do this alone. This has to be all hands on deck.

And that's the essence of this New Alliance. So G-8 nations will pledge to honor the commitments we made in L'Aquila. We must do what we say; no empty promises. And at the same time, we'll deliver the assistance to launch this new effort. Moreover, we're committing to replenish the very successful Global Agricultural and Food Security Program.  That's an important part of this overall effort.

Next, we're going to mobilize more private capital. Today, I can announce that 45 companies -- from major international corporations to African companies and cooperatives -- have pledged to invest more than $3 billion to kick off this effort.  And we're also going to fast-track new agricultural projects so they reach those in need even quicker.

Third, we're going to speed up the development and delivery of innovation -- better seeds, better storage -- that unleash huge leaps in food production. And we're going to tap that mobile phone revolution in Africa so that more data on agriculture -- whether it's satellite imagery or weather forecasts or market prices -- are put in the hands of farmers so they know where to plant and when to plant and when to sell.

Fourth, we're joining with the World Bank and other partners to better understand and manage the risks that come with changing food prices and a changing climate -- because a change in prices or a single bad season should not plunge a family, a community or a region into crisis.

And finally, we're going to keep focusing on nutrition, especially for young children, because we know the effects of poor nutrition can last a lifetime -- it's harder to learn, it's harder to earn a living. When there is good nutrition, especially in those thousand days during pregnancy up to the child's second birthday, it means healthier lives for that child and that mother. And it's the smart thing to do because better nutrition means lower health care costs and it means less need for assistance later on. That's what we're going to do. We're going to sustain the commitments we made three years ago, and we're going to speed things up. And we're starting with these three countries -- Tanzania, Ghana and Ethiopia -- precisely because of their record in improving agriculture and food security.

But this is just the beginning. In the coming months, we'll expand to six countries. We'll welcome other countries that are committed to making tough reforms. We'll welcome more companies that are willing to invest. We're going to hold ourselves accountable; we'll measure results. And we'll stay focused on clear goals: boosting farmers' incomes, and over the next decade, helping 50 million men, women and children lift themselves out of poverty. 

And I know there are going to be skeptics -- there always are. We see heartbreaking images -- fields turned to dust, babies with distended bellies -- and we say it's hopeless, and some places are condemned to perpetual poverty and hunger. But the people in this room disagree. I think most of the American people disagree. Anyone who claims great change is impossible, I say look at the extraordinary successes in development.

Look at the Green Revolution, which pulled hundreds of millions of people out of poverty. 

Moreover, we are already making progress in this area right now. In Rwanda, farmers are selling more coffee and lifting their families out of poverty. In Haiti, some farmers have more than doubled their yields. In Bangladesh, in the poorest region, they've had their first-ever surplus of rice. There are millions of farmers and families whose lives are being transformed right now because of some of the strategies that we're talking about. And that includes a farmer in Ethiopia who got a new loan, increased production, hired more workers. And he said, "This salary changed my life. My kids can now go to school."

And we start getting the wheel turning in the direction of progress. We can do this. We're already doing it. We just need to bring it all together. We can unleash the change that reduces hunger and malnutrition. We can spark the kind of economic growth that lifts people and nations out of poverty. This is the new commitment that we're making. And I pledge to you today that this will remain a priority as long as I am United States President. Thank very much.  God bless you. Thank you. God bless America.

All right, everybody, listen up. First of all, I want to welcome all the leaders here. The press, you're welcome as long as you don't break anything.  This is, by the way, the largest gathering ever of international leaders at Camp David, and I'm glad that we could arrange for good weather. Last night, we had a chance to discuss some core issues that affect our common security. And I want to say that we are unified when it comes to our approach with Iran. I think all of us agree that Iran has the right to peaceful nuclear power, but that its continuing violations of international rules and norms and its inability thus far to convince the world community that it is not pursuing the weaponization of nuclear power is something of grave concern to all of us.

We are hopeful about the discussions that will be taking [place] in Baghdad, but all of us are firmly committed to continuing with the approach of sanctions and pressure, in combination with diplomatic discussions. And our hope is, is that we can resolve this issue in a peaceful fashion that respects Iran's sovereignty and its rights in the international community, but also recognizes its responsibilities.

We had a discussion about Syria. And we all believe that a peaceful resolution and political transition in Syria is preferable. We are all deeply concerned about the violence that's taking place there and the loss of life. We are supportive of the Annan plan, but we agreed -- and I expect this will be reflected in our communique -- that the Annan plan has to be fully implemented and that a political process has to move forward in a more timely fashion to resolve that issue.

We also had a chance to discuss the situation in North Korea. All of us agree that North Korea is violating its international obligations and that there is a path for them to rejoin the international community, but that path is not going to be -- or that objective will not be achieved if they continue with provocative actions that they have shown over the last several months.

And on a brighter note, we had the opportunity to discuss Burma, and all of us are hopeful that the political process and transition and transformation that is beginning to take place there takes root. Many of us have taken action to open up trade and investment with Burma for the first time in many years and we have had discussions with the leaders there. Our hope is, is that this process will continue, and we're going to do everything that we can to encourage that process.

Finally, we had a brief discussion around the issue of women's empowerment, where we agreed that both, when it comes to economic development and when it comes to peace and security issues, empowering women to have a seat at the table and get more engaged and more involved in these processes can be extraordinarily fruitful. And this is something that we will also be introducing during the G20.

So I want to thank all the leaders, despite the fact that at least those coming from across the Atlantic ended up staying up, I guess, until 6:00 in the morning their time. The discussions were very fruitful. This morning, we're going to be spending a lot of time on economic issues. Obviously the eurozone will be one topic, and all of us are absolutely committed to making sure that both growth and stability -- and fiscal consolidation -- are part of a overall package that all of us have to pursue in order to achieve the kind of prosperity for our citizens that we're looking for.

We'll also be talking about uncertainty in the energy markets and how we can help to resolve some of those issues. And we'll be spending some time talking about development in the Middle East, North Africa, and our capacity to sustain economic development in Afghanistan. Obviously, in Chicago, during the NATO meeting, we'll spend more time talking about security matters, but here we want to make sure that we recognize the need for Afghanistan to be able to sustain a development agenda moving forward as we begin to transition out of war.

So, again, I want to thank all the leaders for being here. So far, this has been a frank and useful conversation, and it gives me great optimism about our ability to meet these challenges in the future.

All right. Thank you very much, everybody.

 Good afternoon, everybody.

Chuck, thank you for your words and your friendship and your life of service. Veterans of the Vietnam war, families, friends, distinguished guests, I know it is hot. But you are here to honor your loved ones and Michelle and I could not be more honored to be here with you.

It speaks to the complexity of America's time in Vietnam that, even now, historians cannot agree on precisely when the war began. American advisers had served there and died there as early as the mid- '50s. Major combat operations would not begin until the mid-'60s. But if any year in between illustrated the changing nature of our involvement, it was 1962.

It was January in Saigon. Our Army pilots strapped on their helmets and boarded their helicopters. They lifted off, raced over treetops carrying South Vietnamese troops. It was a single raid against an enemy stronghold, just a few miles into the jungle, but it was one of America's first major operations in that faraway land.

Fifty years later, we come to this wall, to this sacred place, to remember. We can step towards its granite wall and reach out and touch a name. Today is Memorial Day, when we recall all of those who gave everything in the darkness of war so we could stand here in the glory of spring.

And today begins the 50th commemoration of our war in Vietnam. We honor each of those names etched in stone, 58,282 American patriots. We salute all who served with some and we stand with the families who love them still.

For years, you have come here to be with them once more. And in the simple things you have left behind, your offerings, your mementos, your gifts, we get a glimpse of the lives they led: the blanket that covered him as a baby, the baseball bat that he swung as a boy, a wedding ring, a photo of the grandchild he never met, the boots he wore, still caked in mud, the medals she earned, still shining.

And of course, some of the things left here have special meanings known only to the veterans, a can of beer and a packet of M&Ms, a container of Spam, an old field ration, still good, still awful. It is here that we feel the depth of your sacrifice and here we see a piece of our larger American story.

Our founders, in their genius, gave us a task. They set out to make a more perfect union and so it falls to every generation to carry on that work, to keep moving forward to overcome a sometimes painful past, to keep striving for ideals.

And one of the most painful chapters in our history was Vietnam, most particularly how we treated our troops who served there. You are often blamed for a war you didn't start when you should have been commended for serving your country with valor. You are sometimes blamed for misdeeds of a few

when the honorable service of the many should have been praised. You came home and sometimes were denigrated when you should have been celebrated. It was a national shame, a disgrace that should have never happened. That is why here, today, we resolve that it will not happen again.

And so a central part of this 50th anniversary will be to tell your story as it should have been told all along, it's another chance to set the record straight. That is one more way we keep perfecting our union, setting the record straight, and it starts today, because history will honor your service. Your names will join a story of service that stretches back two centuries.

Let us tell the story of a generation of service members, every color, every creed, rich, poor, officer and enlisted, who served with just as much patriotism and honor as any before you. Let's never forget that most of those who served in Vietnam did so by choice.

So many of you volunteered. Your country was at war and you said, "Send me." And that includes our women in Vietnam, every one of you a volunteer.

 Those who were drafted, they, too, went and carried their burden. You served, you did your duty. Your persevered through some of the most brutal conditions ever faced by Americans in war: the suffocating heat, the drenching monsoon rains, an enemy that would come out of nowhere and vanished just as quickly, some of the most intense urban combat in history and battles for a single hill that could rage for weeks.

Let it be said in those hellholes like Briar Patch and The Zoo and the Hanoi Hilton, our Vietnam POWs didn't simply endure, you wrote some of the most extraordinary stories of bravery and integrity in the annals of military history.

Since this is my last visit to Mexico during President Calderon's time in office, I want to say how much I valued Felipe's friendship and the progress that we have made over the past several years. And building on the spirit here at Los Cabos, I'm absolutely confident that the deep ties between our countries will only grow stronger in the years to come. Now, over the past three years, these G-20 summits have allowed our nations to pull the global economy back from a freefall, and put us back on a path of recovery and growth. In the United States, our businesses have created jobs for 27 months in a row, more than 4 million jobs, in all. And our highest priority continues to be putting people back to work even faster.

Today, we recognize that there are a wide range of threats to ongoing global economic recovery and growth. But the one that's received the most focus, obviously, and that is having a significant impact in the United States as well as globally, is the situation in Europe.

As our largest trading partner, slower growth in Europe means slower growth in American jobs. So we have a profound interest in seeing Europe prosper. That's why I've been consulting closely with my European counterparts during this crisis, as we have done here at Los Cabos.

I do think it's important to note, however, that most leaders of the eurozone economies are not part of the G-20. The challenges facing Europe will not be solved by the G-20 or by the United States. The solutions will be debated and decided appropriately by the leaders and the people of Europe.

So this has been an opportunity for us to hear from European leaders on the progress they're making and on their next steps, especially in the wake of the election in Greece and because they're heading into the E.U. summit later this month.

It's also been a chance for the international community, including the United States, the largest economy in the world, and with our own record of responding to financial crises, to stress the importance of decisive action at this moment.

Now, markets around the world as well as governments have been asking if Europe is ready to do what is necessary to hold the eurozone together. Over the last two days, European leaders here in Cabos have made it clear that they understand the stakes and they pledged to take the actions needed to address this crisis and restore confidence, stability and growth.

Let me just be a little more specific. First, our friends in Europe clearly grasp the seriousness of the situation and are moving forward with a heightened sense of urgency. I welcome the important steps that they have already taken to promote growth, financial stability and fiscal responsibility.

I'm very pleased that the European leaders here said they will take all necessary measures to safeguard the integrity and stability of the eurozone to improve the functioning of the financial markets. This will contribute toward breaking the feedback loop between sovereigns and banks and make sovereign borrowing costs sustainable.

I also welcome the adoption of the fiscal compact and its ongoing implementation, assessed on a structural basis, together with a growth strategy which includes structural reforms. G-20 leaders all supported Europe working in partnership with the next Greek government to ensure they remain on the path to reform and sustainability within the eurozone.

Another positive step forward was the eurozone's commitment to work on a more integrated financial architecture, including banking supervision, resolution and recapitalization, as well as deposit insurance.

Also, in the coming days, Spain will lay out the details of its financial support request for its banks' restructuring agency, providing clarity to reassure markets on the form and the amount and the structure of support to be approved at the earliest time.

It's also positive that the eurozone will pursue structural reforms to strengthen competitiveness in deficit countries and to promote demand and growth in surplus countries to reduce imbalances within the euro area.

And finally, I welcome the fact that Europe is determined to move forward quickly on measures to support growth and investment, including by completing the European single market and making better use of European funds.

Of course, Europe is not, as I said, the only source of concern when it comes to global growth. The G-20 also agreed that reversing the economic slowdown demands a renewed focus on growth and job creation. As the world's largest economy, the best thing the United States can do is to create jobs and growth in the short term, even as we continue to put our fiscal house in order over the long term.

And as part of that effort, we made significant progress in advancing our trade agenda. This is an essential to promoting growth, innovation and jobs in the United States. Here in Los Cabos, we announced important steps towards closer integration with three of our major trading partners.

Both Mexico and Canada have been invited to join the Trans- Pacific partnership negotiations, which is an ambitious 21st century trade agreement that will now include 11 countries. And this agreement includes enormous opportunities to boost trade in one of the world's fastest growing regions.

Even as we build this new framework for trade in the Asia Pacific, we're also working to expand our trade with Europe. So today the United States and the European Union agreed to take the next step in our work towards the possible launching of negotiations on an agreement to strengthen our already very deep trade and investment partnership.

In addition, and in keeping with our commitments at the last G-20 in Cannes, we agreed that countries should not intervene to hold their currencies at undervalued levels and that countries with large surpluses and export oriented economies needed to continue to boost demand. So, in closing, I'd note that, with Mexico's leadership, we continue to make progress across a range of challenges that are vital to our shared prosperity, from food security to green economic growth that combats climate change, from financial education and protection for consumers to combating corruption that stifles economic growth and in strengthening financial regulation to creating a more level playing field.

All of this happened, in large part, because of the leadership of President Calderon. I want to thank him and I want to thank my fellow leaders for their partnership as we work very hard to create jobs and opportunity that all of our citizens deserve.

Well, first of all, I think that what I've heard from European leaders during the course of these discussions is they understand the stakes, they understand why it's important for them to take bold and decisive action, and I'm confident they can meet those tests.

Now, I always show great sympathy for my European friends, because they don't have to deal with one Congress, they have to deal with 17 parliaments, if you're talking about the eurozone. If you're talking about the European Union, you're talking about 27. And that means that sometimes, even after they've conceived of approaches to deal with the crisis, they have to work through all the politics to get it done.

And markets are a lot more impatient. And so what I've encouraged them to do is to lay out a framework for where they want to go in increasing European integration, in resolving the financial pressures that are on sovereign countries.

Even if they can't achieve all of it in one fell swoop, I think if people have a sense of where they're going, that can provide confidence and break the fever because, you know, if you think about Europe, look, this remains one of the wealthiest most productive regions of the world.

Europe continues to have enormous strengths a very well educated productive workforce. They have, you know, some of the biggest, best- run companies in the world. They have trading relationships around the world.

And all these problems that they're facing right now are entirely solvable, but the markets, when they start seating potential uncertainty, show a lot more risk aversion, and you can start getting into a negative cycle. And what we have to do is to create a positive cycle where people become more confident, the markets settle down and they have the time and the space to execute the kinds of structural reforms that not only Europe but all of us are having to go through in balancing the need for growth, but also dealing with issues like debt and deficits.

And I'm confident that over the next several weeks Europe will paint a picture of where we need to go, take some immediate steps that are required to give them that time and space and, based on the conversations that I've had here today and the conversations I've had over the last several months, I'm confident that they are very much committed to the European project.

Now, all this affects the United States. Europe, as a whole, is our largest trading partner. And if fewer folks are buying stuff in Paris or Berlin, that means that we're selling less stuff made in Pittsburgh or Cleveland.

But I think there are a couple of things that we've already done that help the financial regulatory reforms that we've passed, means that our banks are better capitalized. That means that our supervision and our mechanisms for looking at trouble spots in our financial system are superior to what they were back in 2008.

That's an important difference. But there's still some more things we can do. And the most important thing we can do is something that I've already talked about. If Congress would act on a jobs plan that independent economists say would put us on the path of creating an extra million jobs on top of the ones that have already been created, putting teachers back in the classroom, putting construction workers back on the job, rebuilding infrastructure that badly needs to be rebuilt.

And I spent a lot of time talking with folks who'd spent the past couple of years making their way through a tough economy. And today we're still fighting our way back from the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression.

The economy's growing again, but it's not growing as fast as we want it to grow. Our businesses have created almost 4.3 million new jobs over the last 27 months. But, as we learned in today's jobs report, we're still not creating them as fast as we want.

And just like at this time last year, our economy is still facing some serious headwinds. We had high gas prices a month, two months ago and they're starting to come down. And, you know, they were spiking, but they're still hitting people's wallets pretty hard. That has an impact.

And then, most prominently, most recently, we've had a crisis in Europe's economy that is having an impact worldwide and it's starting to cast a shadow on our own as well. So we've got a lot of work to do before we get to where we need to be. And all these factors have made it even more challenging to not just fully recover, but also lay the foundation for an economy that's built to last over the long term. But that's our job.

From the moment we first took action to prevent another depression, we knew the road to recovery would not be easy, we knew it would take time, we knew there would be ups and downs along the way, but we also knew if we were willing to act wisely and boldly, and if we were acting together as Americans, if we were willing to keep at it, if we were willing to roll up our sleeves and never quit, then we wouldn't just come back, we'd come back stronger than ever.

Look, we can't fully control everything that happens in other parts of the world -- disturbances in the Middle East, what's going on in Europe. But there are plenty of things we can control here at home. There are plenty of steps we can take right now to help create jobs and grow this economy.

Let me give you a couple of examples. I sent Congress a jobs bill last September full of the kinds of bipartisan ideas that would have put our fellow Americans back to work and help reinforce our economy against some of these outside shots. I sent them a plan that would have reduced the deficit by $4 trillion in a way that is balanced, that pays for the job-creating investments we need, by cutting unnecessary spending, but also by asking the wealthiest Americans to pay a little more in taxes.



And I -- you know, I'll give them a little bit of credit. Congress has passed a few parts of that jobs bill, like a tax cut that's allowing working Americans to keep more of your paychecks every week.

 That was important. I appreciate it but Congress has not acted on enough of the other ideas in the bill that would help make a difference and help create jobs right now.

And there's no excuse for it. Not when there's so many people out there still looking for work. Not when there's still folks out there struggling to pay their bills.

It's not lost on anybody that it's an election year. I understand that. I've noticed





 They -- but -- but we've got responsibilities that are bigger than an election. We've got responsibilities to you. So, my message to Congress is now is not time to play politics. Now is not the time to sit on your hands.

The American people expect their leaders to work hard no matter what year it is. The economy still isn't where it needs to be. There's steps that could make a difference right now, steps that can also serve as a buffer in case the situation in Europe gets any worse.

So, right now Congress should pass a bill to help states prevent more layoffs so we can put thousands of teachers and firefighters and police officers backed on the job.



 Now layoffs at the state and local levels have been a chronic problem for our recovery, but it's a problem that we can fix. Congress should have passed a bill a long time ago to put thousands of construction workers back on the job rebuilding our roads and our bridges and our runways.



 Now, since the housing bubble burst, no sector's been hit harder than the construction industry. And we've got all this stuff that needs fixed, remember that bridge here in Minnesota?

So this -- this is a problem we can fix. Let's -- let's do it right away. Instead of just talking about job creators, Congress should give small business owners a tax break for hiring more workers and paying them higher wages.

We can get that done, we can get it done right now, let's not wait.



 Right now Congress should give every responsible homeowner the opportunity to save an average of $3,000 a year by refinancing their mortgages. We've got a historically low rates right now.



I was with a family in Reno, Nevada, a couple weeks ago.

 They got a chance to refinance even though their home was underwater, put that money back in their pockets because we had taken some steps as an administration to make that available for those who have mortgages held by government agencies like the FHA or government guaranteed. But not everybody has those kinds of mortgages. I want everybody to have those same opportunities.

I assume there are some folks here who could use $3,0000 a year.



Let's get that done right now. That means there're gonna be -- you know, if you have $3,000 a year extra that helps you pay down your credit cards, that helps you go out and -- and buy some things that your family needs -- which is good for business. Maybe somebody will be replacing some thingamajig for their furnace.



They've been -- they've been putting that off. But if they got that extra money they might just go out there and buy that thing.



Right?

Look...



Right now Congress needs to extend the tax credit for clean energy manufacturers that are set to expire at the end of this year.

You know, I was talking to Dave Cote. The issue of energy efficiency and -- and everything we need to do to shift away from dependence on foreign oil we're making huge progress. You know, we're actually importing less oil than any time in the last eight years. We're down under 50 percent. But we can do more.

And -- and these clean energy companies, they're hiring folks. They're helping us break dependence on foreign oil. It's part of a package of stuff that Honeywell's doing a lot of work on.

But almost 40,000 jobs are on the line if these tax credits expire. Why would anyone in Congress walk away from those jobs? We need to pass those tax credits right now. We need to pass them right now.



It's long past time we start encouraging what a lot of companies have been doing lately, which is bringing jobs back to this country.



And some of them are coming to Minnesota. The governor and I were talking in the car about some company's coming back -- Red Bull, right?



 But let's give 'em more incentive. It's time for Congress to end tax breaks for companies that ship jobs overseas.

 Let's use that money to cover moving expenses for companies that are bringing jobs back to America. That would make a difference right now.



So those are all steps that we could be taking to strengthen the economy, to provide us some insurance if the situation overseas starts getting worse, so we control our own destiny; keep this recovery moving forward.

Which brings me to the last thing Congress should do to help businesses create jobs. That's why I'm here at Honeywell today. I believe that no one who fights for this country should ever have to fight for a job when they come home.



And for Congress, that means creating a veterans jobs corps so we can put our returning heroes back to work as cops and firefighters, on projects that protect our public lands and resources. And they should do it right now. They should do it right now.

But if we're going to serve our veterans as well as they've served us, we've got to do even more. We just observed Memorial Day, which makes us think about the extraordinary sacrifices so many make. But it's -- we've got to make sure we translate words into action. We can't just be in a parade. We can't just march. We also have to deliver for -- for our veterans.

Over the past three decades -- over the past decades, rather, more than 3 million servicemembers have transitioned back to civilian life. And now that the war in Iraq is over and we're starting to wind down the war in Afghanistan...



... over a million more of those outstanding heroes, they're going to be joining this process to transition back into civilian life over the next few years. Now, just think about the skills these veterans have acquired at an incredibly young age. Think about the leadership they've learned -- 25-year-olds, 26-year-olds leading platoons in unbelievably dangerous situations, life or death situations.

 Think about the cutting edge technologies they've mastered. Their ability to changing and unpredictable situations you can't get that stuff from a classroom.

I mean these kids, these men, these women, they've done incredible work and that's exactly the kind of leadership and responsibility that every business in America should be wanting to attract, should be competing to attract.

That's the kind of talent we need to compete for the jobs and the industries of the future. These are the kind of Americans every company should want to hire.



 And that's why here at Honeywell you've made it a mission to hire more veterans.



 And let me say you know Dave is incredibly patriotic, loves his veterans but Honeywell isn't doing this not because it feels good, they are doing it because it is good for business, because veterans make outstanding workers.

So today I am taking executive action that will make it easy for a lot of companies to do same thing. And I've told this story before of a soldier in the 82nd Airborne who served as a combat medic and Afghanistan saved lives and earned a bronze star for his actions, but he came home here to Minnesota, met him at Cannon -- our way to Cannon Falls.

When he first came home he couldn't even get a job as a first responder. Think about, this guy's out there taking care of troops who are wounded in action couldn't initially get a job.

So he took us as to the post 9/11 the G.I. Bill, classes that he could have taught just so he could qualify for the same duties at home that he had performed every day at the war.

Let me tell you something. If you can save a life on the battlefield, you can save a life in an ambulance.



 If you can -- if you can oversee a convoy for millions of dollars of assets in Iraq, you can help manage a supply chain or balance its books here at home.

If you can maintain the most advanced weapons in the world, if you are an electrician on a -- on a Navy ship, well you can manufacture the next generation of advanced technology in our factories like this one.



 If you're working on complex machinery, you should be able to take those skills and find a manufacturing job right here -- right here at home.

 If you -- if you can maintain the most advanced weapons in the world; if you're an electrician on a -- on a Navy ship, you can manufacture the next generation of advanced technology in our factories like this one.



If you're working on complex machinery, you should be able to take those skills and find a manufacturing job right here -- right here at home.

But unfortunately, a lot of returning heroes with advanced skills like these, they don't get hired simply because they don't have civilian licenses or certifications that a lot of companies require.

At the same time, I hear from business leaders all the time who say they can't find enough workers with the skills necessary to fill open positions; 80 percent of manufacturers say this, according to one survey.

So think about it. We've got all these openings and all these skilled veterans looking for work, and somehow they're missing each other. That doesn't make any sense. So that's where executive action comes in. That's where we're going to fix it.

Today, I'm proud to announce new partnerships between the military and manufacturing groups that will make it easier for companies to hire returning servicemembers who prove they've earned the skills our country needs.



Soldiers, sailors, Marines, airmen, coast guardsmen, if they've got skills in machining or welding or weapons maintenance, for example, you'll have a faster track to good-paying manufacturing jobs. Servicemembers with experience in logistics or maintenance on the frontlines, they'll have a faster track to jobs in those fields here at home.

I've also directed the Department of Defense to establish a new task force charged with finding new opportunities for servicemembers to use the skills they've learned in the military to gain the relevant industry credentials, the civilian certifications and licenses so that it doesn't cost them and they don't necessarily have to go back to school for three years and take out a whole bunch of student loans when potentially they could do it quicker, more inexpensively, and get on the job faster.

We're talking about jobs in manufacturing and health care and I.T., in logistics, for first responders. So that returning combat medic that I spoke about, he doesn't have to prove himself over and over again.

 So this task force's first action is going to create opportunities for up to 126,000 servicemembers to gain the industry- recognized certifications for high-demand manufacturing jobs like the jobs right here at this plant at Honeywell.



And this builds on the Skills for America's Future partnership that we launched last year with the National Association of Manufacturers to provide 500,000 community college students with industry-recognized credentials that'll help them secure good manufacturing jobs.

And all of this builds on the steps we've already taken to make sure our returning heroes come home able to share in the opportunities that they have defended, 'cause when our men and women sign up to become a soldier, a sailor, an airman, Marine, Coast Guardsman, they don't stop being a citizen. When they take off that uniform their service to this nation doesn't stop.

Think about previous generations. Well, today's veterans are the same. When they come home they're looking to continue serving America however they can. And at a time when America needs all hands on deck, they've got the skills and the strength to help lead the way.

Our government needs their patriotism and their sense of duty. That's why I ordered the hiring of more veterans by the federal government. We've hired more than 200,000 so far.



Our economy needs their outstanding talent. That's why I pushed hard last year for tax breaks for businesses that hire unemployed veterans and wounded warriors. And I'm proud to say that both parties in Congress came together to get that part done.

 That's why we launched free personalized job services -- job search services through the veterans Gold Card program and an online veterans job bank to help veterans find jobs that meet their talents.

By the way, if there're any veterans here who need those services you can find that at whitehouse.gov/vets.

And then later this month the V.A. will hold a jobs fair in Detroit where 12,000 more opportunities will be available to veterans.

And that's also why I challenge business leaders to hire 100,000 post-9/11 veterans and their spouses by the end of next year. Because don't forget our military families. They're serving alongside our veterans.



Michelle and Jill Biden -- that's Michelle Obama and Jill Biden...



Just in case you were curious. You might not know which Michelle I was talking about.



They're leading this effort with respect to military families nationally -- it's called Joining Forces -- to mobilize all of us to support today's military families and their veterans.

And -- and so far the good news is participating businesses have hired more than 70,000 veterans, and they've pledged to hire 175,000 more in the coming years.

And I want to thank Honeywell not only for being an active partner in this initiative, but right here Honeywell has hired 900 veterans over the past year and for employing 65 veterans just here at Golden Valley.

So give them a big round of applause. Proud of 'em.



Proud of 'em. 

 You know, standing up for our veterans, this is not a Democratic responsibility, it's not a Republican responsibility; it's an American responsibility. It's an obligation of every citizen who enjoys the freedom that these heroes defended.

So we got to meet our obligations today just like folks here at Honeywell are doing. And as commander in chief I want to -- I want all of our servicemembers and veterans to know we are forever grateful for your service and your sacrifice.

Just like you fought for us, we'll keep fighting for you.



 For more jobs, more security, for the opportunity to keep your families strong because you'll help us keep America on top in the 21st Century.



 We're going to keep fighting just as you did to show just why it is the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth.

God Bless you. God Bless America.

 Hello, Iowa!  Some of you may not have seats, but I want to make everybody comfortable. But don't worry, I'm not going to talk that long. I didn't want to give that impression.

I just had a wonderful tour of this facility. And I was telling some of the folks we couldn't take the helicopters in because the winds were too strong, so you are definitely in the right business.  Obviously there's some wind power here in Iowa that we want to tap.

I want to thank Quinten for the terrific introduction and for sharing his story. Give Quinten a big round of applause. 

I want to thank your mayor, Mayor Allen, for welcoming us here today.  Tom was instrumental in helping transform Newton and he's still got your back. He is still fighting every single day for every single person in this town, but all across rural America. And so we're very proud of him.

Now, we all know how difficult these past few years have been for the country. Iowa has actually done a little better than some other states, but it's still been tough. And after the worst recession of our lifetimes, it's going to take some time for the economy to fully recover -- more time than a lot of us would like. And we're still facing some headwinds, like the situation in Europe right now, which is having an impact on our economy.

But while there's certain economic developments we can't control, there are a bunch of things that we can control. There are plenty of steps that we can take right now -- steps that we must take right now -- to speed up this recovery and to create jobs, and to restore some of the financial security that a lot of families have lost. It's within our control to do all of that right now. But here's the thing --  It's true, we can make that difference.

The challenge we've got is that too many folks aren't on the same page. We've got too many of my dear Republican friends in Congress that have been standing in the way of some steps that we could take that would make a difference at the moment. Either they say they don't want to do anything at all, or they don't want to do it before the election, or they want to double down on some of the policies that didn't work and helped to get us into this mess in the first place.

And Newton knows something about that -- because Newton lost manufacturing. Newton lost Maytag. A lot of the trends that we had seen even before the financial crisis hit, hit Newton first. And so when you hear somebody say we should cut more taxes, especially for the wealthiest Americans, well, Newton, you've been there and you've done that. We did that -- 2000, 2001, 2003. When you hear people say that we should cut back more on the rules we put in place for banks and financial institutions to avoid another taxpayer bailout -- well, we tried that. When people say that we should just wait until the housing market hits bottom and hope that it comes back, hope for the best -- well, that's not an answer for people. That doesn't make sense.

We've tried at lot of these ideas for nearly a decade. It did not work. We saw manufacturing moving offshore. We saw a few people do very well, but too many families struggling just to get by -- all before the financial crisis hit. And the financial crisis made it worse. So we can't go backwards. We've got to move forward. We've got to build an economy where hard work and responsibility pay off, where you can find a good job and own your own home, maybe start your own businesses and give your kids a chance for a better future. 

So I've been pushing Congress to help us get there by passing a few common-sense policies that would strengthen the economy and put more folks to work right now. We even made a handy "To-Do" list that they can check off. It's just like the to-do list Michelle gives me, a "honey-do" list. 

And like I said, I kept it simple. There are just five things. I didn't want to overload Congress with too much at once.  But these are all ideas that will make a difference right now and we shouldn't wait for an election to get them done.

So first up on the list, it makes no sense that we're actually still giving tax breaks to companies that ship jobs and factories overseas. That doesn't make sense at all. That doesn't make any sense. 

Second, we've asked Congress to give every responsible homeowner -- folks who have been making their mortgage payments -- the opportunity to save an average of $3,000 a year by refinancing their mortgage and taking advantage of these historically low rates. The problem is a lot of folks are having trouble refinancing if their home is underwater, if it's worth less than their mortgage, and sometimes banks have been pulling back a little bit. We want to make it easier for people to refinance. So that's the second thing because that will create -- that will put more money in the economy for everybody. And if you've got an extra $3,000 in your pocket, then you'll go shopping, you'll go out to a restaurant -- suddenly there's a lot more money circulating and the economy gets stronger. So that's the second thing.

Two weeks ago I was in Reno, Nevada, with a family -- they got a chance to refinance because of some steps that we had already taken administratively, and it's making a huge difference in their lives. And we want all families to have that same opportunity.

Third thing, instead of just talking about job creators -- you always hear -- every member of Congress has said, we've got to help the job creators. Okay, let's help them. Congress should help small business owners who create most of the new jobs in America -- small business owners -- 

Fourth thing, we have done a whole lot to make sure that those men and women who have served us in Iraq and Afghanistan, that we are serving them as well as they've served us --  So we put together the Post-9/11 GI Bill so they're able to go back and get some training and skills. We mobilized the private sector to hire more veterans and give them the private sector incentives to hire more veterans.

But there's another thing we can do. Congress should create what we're calling a Veterans Jobs Corps, so that we can help communities across America put our returning heroes back to work as police officers and firefighters and park rangers. Nobody who fought for our country overseas should have to fight for a job when they come back home. We've still got too much unemployment among our veterans. 

So those are four simple things. And the fifth thing is the reason why I'm here today. The fifth item on my "To-Do" list -- I'm calling on Congress to extend tax credits that are set to expire at the end of the year for clean-energy companies like TPI. 

Many of you know the story of what's happening here better than I do, but I just want to remind you how far we've come. Shortly after I took office, I came to Newton -- some of you remember -- and we unveiled an all-of-the-above energy strategy for America. We said let's produce more oil and gas, but let's also produce more biofuels; let's produce more fuel-efficient cars; let's produce more solar and wind power and other sources of clean, renewable energy. And I came to Newton because Newton is helping to lead the way when it comes to building wind turbines.

And since then, our dependence on foreign oil has gone down every single year that I've been in office -- every single year.  So this country is on the path towards more energy independence. And that's good for everybody. It's good for people's pocketbooks; it's good for the environment; it's good for our national security. We don't want our economy dependent on something that happens on the other side of the world. We don't want every time there's a scare about war or some regime change in the Middle East that suddenly everybody here is getting socked and the whole economy is going down.

And the best thing is, in the process, we're also putting thousands of Americans back to work -- because the more we rely on American-made energy, the less oil we buy from other countries, the more jobs we create here at home, the more jobs we create here in Iowa.

So let's look at the wind industry. It's so important to Iowa. This industry, thanks in large part to some very important tax credits, has now taken off. The state of Iowa now gets nearly 20 percent of all your electricity from wind -- 20 percent. Overall, America now has enough wind capacity to power 10 million homes. So this is an industry on the rise. And as you know, it's an industry that's putting people to work. You know this firsthand. There are more wind power jobs in Iowa than any other state. That's a big deal. 

And one of these modern windmills has more than 8,000 different parts -- everything from the towers and the blades to the gears, to the electrical switches. And it used to be that almost all these parts were imported. Today, more and more of these parts are being made here in America -- right here.  We used to have just a few dozen manufacturing facilities attached to the wind industry. Today we have nearly 500 facilities in 43 states employing tens of thousands of American workers -- tens of thousands.

So we're making progress. And you know it better than anybody. I mean, when I was talking to Quinten and Mark and a whole bunch of the other folks who are working here, they reminded me of the experience at working at Maytag and putting your heart and soul into a company and making a great product, and then, suddenly having that company leave, and how hard that was for families and how hard it was for the community. But folks made the transition.

And now, when you look at what's happening here -- 700 to 800 jobs, over $30 million being put back into the community -- this gives folks hope. It gives people opportunity. I met some folks who have been in manufacturing for 30 years, but I also met a couple of young folks who were just getting started. And that's what we're looking for. Nobody wants a handout. Nobody wants to get something for nothing. But if we've got a chance to create energy and create value and put people back to work, why wouldn't we do that?

So I'm here today because, as much progress as we've made, that progress is in jeopardy. If Congress doesn't act, those tax credits that I mentioned -- the ones that helped build up the wind industry, the ones that helped to bring all these jobs to Newton, those tax credits will expire at the end of the year if Congress doesn't do anything. If Congress doesn't act, companies like this one will take a hit. Jobs will be lost. That's not a guess, that's a fact. We can't let that happen. And keep in mind that -- and this is something Congress needs to understand -- Dave Loebsack understands it, but I want every member of Congress to understand it. These companies that are putting in orders for these amazing blades, they're making plans now. They're making decisions now. So if they're cutting back on their orders, if they're not confident that the industry is going to be moving at a fast clip and they start reducing orders here, that affects you. You can't wait for six months. You can't wait for eight months. You can't wait for a year to get this done. It's got to be done now. 

So this is a simple thing on Congress's "To-Do" list -- extend these tax credits. Do it now. Every day they don't act business grows more concerned that they will not be renewed. They're worried demand for their products is going down, so they start thinking twice about expanding, more cautious about making new investments. They start looking overseas. I was talking to your CEO. We got an opportunity to branch out, but we want to branch out by making the stuff here and then sending it there. We don't want to branch out by sending the jobs and the investments over there, and then shipping it back to America. That doesn't make sense.  One company that had plans to invest $100 million to build a wind manufacturing plant in Arkansas -- and create hundreds of jobs -- put those plans on hold.

And by the way, this should not be a partisan issue. There are several Republican governors -- including the governor of this state -- who are calling on Congress to act. There are members of Congress in both chambers and on both sides of the aisle -- including your two senators -- who support these tax credits. And that doesn't happen much in Washington where Democrats and Republicans say they agree on something. So if you agree, why haven't we gotten it done yet?

This is not just an issue, by the way, for the wind industry. Some of America's most prominent companies -- from Starbucks to Campbell's Soup -- they're calling on Congress to act because they use renewable energy.

Sometimes when I think about Washington and Congress -- and I know some of you think the same way -- I don't get it. I understand why we wouldn't get something if we really disagree on something. And there are some big disagreements: They want to make big cuts to pay for more big tax cuts for the wealthy. I disagree with that. I think we should have a balanced approach -- cut waste, but make sure that everybody is paying their fair share.  An issue like that, maybe it can't get settled before an election because they just have a different approach. I understand that. But this, everybody says they agree to or at least a lot of people agree to it.

So I'm going to need your help. I need you to get involved. I need you to help get this done. I need everybody here in Newton -- and I mean everybody -- I don't just mean folks who work at TPI -- anybody who's watching, everybody here in Iowa, pick up the phone, send an e-mail, send a tweet, tell Congress, let's do the right thing. Tell Congress the story of Newton. Tell folks why it's so important to this community. Tell them we've come too far to turn back now. 

It used to be Newton was known for building washers and dryers, used to be Newton was known for Maytag. And obviously they were a big employer -- thousands of people working in the area. But back in 2007 when they closed down the operations here, that was a major blow. And everybody here, if you don't -- if you weren't affected personally by it, you were affected indirectly. Your friends, your neighbors, friends like Quinten were forced to start all over again. And he didn't give up. You didn't give up. You kept pushing ahead. Some of you had to retrain. Pretty soon after one industry had left, another showed up. Some of the facilities that Maytag closed were reopened. So a lot of folks who used to build washers and dryers, now they're part of the future, building an industry that's going to make America stronger. That's the story of Newton. That's the story of America.

So, yes, we're facing tough times, but we're getting through them. We're getting through them together -- because in this country, just like in Newton, we don't give up. We keep moving. We keep moving forward. And if we work together with a common purpose, we will get this economy back on track -- and remind everybody why America is the greatest country on Earth.

Thank you, everybody. God bless you. God bless America. Thank you. 

 Well, good afternoon, everybody and thank you for arranging a beautiful day. This is just a spectacular afternoon and I'm -- I'm thrilled to be here.

We all know how difficult these past few years have been for this country, but especially for this state. After the worst recession in our lifetimes, a crisis that followed the collapse of the housing market, it's going to take a long time for the economy to fully recover, more time than any of us would like.

But there are plenty of steps that we can take to speed up the recovery right now. There are things we can do right now to help create jobs and help restore some of the financial security that too many families have lost.

Now, I have to say that there are a few too many Republicans in Congress who don't seem to be as optimistic as we are. They -- they think that all we can do are try the things that have been done in the past, things that they've tried in the past.

So they want to cut more taxes, especially for the wealthiest Americans. They want to cut back on the rules that we put in place for banks and financial institutions. They've said that they want to let the housing market hit bottom and just hope for the best. That's it. We've heard those ideas before. That's their economic agenda.

 I'll be honest with you, I don't buy it. I think they're wrong. We tried their ideas for nearly a decade and they didn't work. And I refuse to sell this country short by going back to the exact same ideas that helped to get us in this mess in the first place.

Our goal is to build an economy where hard work and responsibility are rewarded, where you can find a good job, make a good wage, own your own home, maybe start a business, send your kids to college. You know, hopefully, their lives will be even better than ours. That's what I wish for Malia and Sasha and I know you guys feel the same way who have kids.

And that's where we need to go. I've been pushing Congress to help us get there by passing a few common sense policies that we're convinced will make a difference. We even made a handy to-do list for Congress so they can just check them off. It's a list like Michelle gives me. I know Paul's familiar with that list. He gets it from Val.

Now, there are only five things on this list, because I don't want to overload Congress with too much at once. But they are ideas that will help create jobs and build a stronger economy right now. So first up on the list, it makes absolutely no sense that we actually give tax breaks to companies that ship jobs and factories overseas.

Second, instead of just talking about job creators, Congress should help small businesses and help small-business owners who create most of the new jobs in America. So we want to give them a tax break for hiring more workers and paying them higher wages.

The third thing on our to-do list, Congress should extend tax credits that are set to expire for our clean energy companies. These businesses are putting folks to work here in this state of Nevada -- last time I was here, in fact, I went to see a -- huge solar plant, solar energy plant. A lot of folks are working both in the construction of it and maintaining it. That's happening all across the country.

And so we've got to make sure that we are helping those folks because that helps us break our dependence on foreign oil. Over the long term that'll help drive down gas prices and it puts people to work right now. It's the right thing to do.



Fourth, Congress should create a veterans jobs corps so that we can help communities higher returning heroes, our veterans, as cops and firefighters, and employees at national parks. Because nobody who fights for this country should even have to come home and fight for a job or fight for a roof over their heads.



 Alright, so that's four. Which brings me to the fifth.

The fifth thing on the list and that's why I'm here today. I'm calling on Congress to give every responsible homeowner the chance to save an average of $3,000 a year by refinancing their mortgage.

It's a simply idea, it makes great sense. And I know it'll have an impact. Last October, I was in Clark County where I announced new steps to help responsible homeowners refinance their homes.

And at the time, Congress wasn't willing to act, so we did. We went ahead and did what we could do administratively, without a new law being passed. And as a result, Americans who were previously stuck in high interest loans have been able to take advantage of these lower rates.

And they've been able to save thousands of dollars every year. And it turns out that two of those people are your neighbors, Paul and Valerie Keller.



So, I just had a chance to -- to visit with Paul and Valerie and look at their beautiful home, and check out the grill out back. Valerie says Paul is a pretty good cook, so I'm going to take her word for it.

 The Kellers have lived in this house for 14 years. Val works nearby, helping secure loans for farmers and ranchers. Paul is a retired electrical contractor who started a family business with their son. Last year, with mortgage rates at historic lows, the Kellers decided it would make sense for them to refinance.

They thought it would be easy since they're current on their mortgage, they make their payments on time. So this is an example of responsible homeowners doing the right thing. But when they tried to refinance, they were told they couldn't do it because the Keller's house, like thousands of others in this state and probably some of the neighbors here, their house is underwater, which means that the price is currently lower than what they owe on it.

 So they were -- they were hit -- you were hit -- with a historic drop in housing prices, which caused the value of homes in their neighborhood to plummet. And a lot of banks historically have said, "Well, we're not going to refinance you if you home's under water."

Now, luckily the Kellers saw my announcement that I had made down in Clark County. So I'm assuming it must have been Val because whenever something smart's done it's usually the wife in the house.



So they called their lender, and within a few months, within 90 days, they were able to refinance under this new program that we set up. Their monthly mortgage bill has now dropped $240 a month, and that means every year they're saving close to $3,000.



Now, Val says that they've been talking to some of their neighbors, maybe some of you are here today, and you're saying, "Well, that sounds like a pretty good idea."

 And a lot of folks across the country recognize this is a smart thing to do not only for homeowners but for our economy because if Paul and Val have an extra $240, $250 a month then they might spend it on the local business. They might go to a restaurant a little more often. They might spoil their grandkids even more.

And that means more money in the economy. And businesses do better. And slowly home prices start rising again. So it makes sense for all of us.

And the good news is, since I've made this announcement, refinancing applications have gone up by 50 percent nationwide and 230 percent here in Nevada alone. That's the good news, people are taking advantage of this.



That's what we want to see. But here is the only catch, and this is where you come in because you're going to have to pressure Congress. The pool of folks who can refinance right now when their homes are underwater is still too small.

The reason the Kellers were able to refinance is because the only thing that we could do without Congressional action was to give opportunities for refinancing for folks with a government-backed loan, an FHA-backed loan.

But in order to expand that opportunity we want to include everybody, people whose mortgages aren't government-backed.



And in order to do that we've got to have Congress move. There's absolutely no reason why they can't make this happen right now. If they started now in a couple weeks, in a month they could make every homeowner in America who's underwater right now eligible to be able to refinance their homes if they're making their payments, if they're responsible, if they're doing the right thing.

And think about all those families saving $3,000 on average a month. That's a huge boost to our economy. And for some of you who are under water you might say, "Instead of spending that money I can plow that back into equity in my home and build that back up," which would further strengthen housing prices here in Nevada and around the country. So it's the right thing to do. There's already a bill in the works. It's supported by independent non-partisan economists. It's supported by industry leaders. Congress should pass it right now.

And...



Let -- let me just say this. Maybe there's some members of Congress watching.



If you need some motivation to make this happen then you should come to Reno and you should visit with folks like the Kellers.

I'm not saying -- I'm not saying the Kellers want all these members of Congress up in their house.



It's bad enough having me and the Secret Service in there. But at least they -- they probably wouldn't mind saying hello and talking to them here in front of their house.

But they -- they should talk to people whose lives are better because of the action that we took. All over the country, there are people just like Paul and Val, folks just like you, who are doing everything they can to do the right thing, to meet their responsibilities, to look after their families, to raise their kids right, give them good values.

You're not looking for a handout. You just want to make sure that somebody's looking out for you, and that when you do the right thing, that you're able to keep everything that you've worked for. That's what folks are looking for, and that's what they expect from Washington -- to put the politics aside and the electioneering aside and -- and just do what's right for people.



So -- so, I need all of you and everybody who's watching to push Congress on their to-do list.

Nag 'em until they actually get it done. We need to keep moving this country forward, send them an e-mail, tweet 'em. Write them a letter if you're old fashioned like me. But -- but communicate to them that this will make a difference. It's -- it's one small step that will help us create the kind of economy that all Americans deserve.

And that's an economy that's built to last. An economy where everybody gets a fair shot, everybody gets a fair share, everybody's playing by the same set of rules. That's what made us great in the past, that's what's going to make us great in the future.

All right? Thank you very -- thank you everybody. God bless you. God bless America. And give Paul and Val a big round of applause.

So it is wonderful to be here at the University of Albany Nano College. This is one of the only colleges in the world dedicated to nanotechnology, and it's an incredible complex. But you're working on particles as small as an atom, and you're doing it in rooms that are 10,000 times cleaner than a hospital operating room, which is very impressive, since clean is not usually a word I associate with college students.



Maybe things have changed since I was in school. Now, the reason I came here today is because this school -- bless you -- and this community represents the future of our economy. Right now, some of the most advanced manufacturing work in America is being done right here in upstate New York. Cutting-edge businesses from all over the world are deciding to build here and hire here, and you've got schools like this one that are training workers with the exact skills that those businesses are looking for.

Now, we know the true engine of job creation in this country is the private sector. It's not Washington. But there are steps we can take as a nation to make it easier for companies to grow and to hire, to create platforms of success for them, everything from giving more people the chance to get the right training and education to supporting new research projects into science and technology.

In fact, there was a substantial investment made here -- I was talking to Governor Cuomo about the investment his father made here to help get this center started. There are things we can do to make sure that if you're willing to work hard and meet your responsibilities, you can find a job, own a home, maybe start a business, and, most importantly, give your kids a chance to do even better than you did.

And that's something we believe has to be available to everybody, no matter where you come from, no matter what you look like. We can make a difference. And at this make-or-break moment for America's middle class, there's no excuse for inaction. There's no excuse for dragging our feet, none.

Now, over the last few years, there are certain steps that I've been able to take on my own to help spur the kind of innovation that we're seeing here and, also, to help the overall economy grow. So we announced a new policy several months back that will help families refinance their mortgages, save up to -- to thousands of dollars a year.

We sped up loans and competitive grants for new projects all across the country so thousands of construction workers can get back on the job. We simplified the student loan process to help roughly 5.8 million students, like the students here, save money on repayments.



So these are some steps that the administration's been able to take on its own. But the truth is, the only way we can accelerate the job creation that takes place on a scale that is needed is bold action from Congress. Because of the Recovery Act, because of all the work we've done, we've created over 4 million jobs over the last two years. We've created hundreds of thousands of jobs each month over the last several -- over the last several months. So we're making progress, but everybody knows we need to do more.

And in order to do that, we're going to need some more action from Congress. Democrats and Republicans have to come together. And they've shown that they can do it. I mean, they did some important work. They passed tax cuts for workers, approved trade deals to open up new markets for American products. We reformed our patent system to make it easier for innovative ideas to come to market. Those are all good things. But the size of the challenges we face requires us to do more.

So back last September, I sent Congress a jobs bill. It included all sorts of policies that we knew would help grow our economy and put more Americans back to work. That wasn't just my opinion. That wasn't just the opinion of Democrats. It was the opinion of independent, nonpartisan experts, economists who do this for a living, and analysts on Wall Street who evaluate what's going to really make the economy grow.

The one big piece that we were able to get done was make sure that we didn't see payroll tax go up and people get $40 bucks taken out of their paychecks each -- each time.

But most of it didn't get done in Congress.

 Just about every time we put these policies up for a vote, the Republicans in Congress got together and they said no. They said no to putting hundreds of thousands of construction workers back on the job repairing our roads and our bridges and our schools and our transit systems, no to a new tax cut for businesses that hire new workers, no to putting more teachers back in our classrooms, more cops back on the beat, more firefighters back to work. And this is at a time when we know one of the biggest drags on our economy has been layoffs by state and local governments. That's true all across the country.

And it's worth noting, by the way -- this is just a little aside -- after there was a recession under Ronald Reagan, government employment went way up. It went up after the recessions under the first George Bush and the second George Bush. So each time there was a recession with a Republican president, compensated -- we compensated by making sure that government didn't see a drastic reduction in employment. The only time government employment has gone down during a recession has been under me. So I make that point...



I make that point just so you don't buy into this whole bloated government argument that you hear. And, frankly, if Congress had said yes to helping states put teachers back to work and put the economy before our politics, then tens of thousands of more teachers in New York would have a job right now. That is a fact. And that would mean not only a lower unemployment rate, but also more customers for businesses.

Now, I know this is an election year, but it's not an excuse for inaction. Six months is plenty of time for Democrats and Republicans to get together and do the right thing, taking steps that will spur additional job creation right now. Just saying no to ideas that we know will help our economy isn't an option. There's too much at stake. We've all got to pull in the same direction.

So even if Republicans are still saying no to some of the bigger proposals we made in the Jobs Act, there are some additional ideas that could help people get to work right now and that they haven't said no to yet, so I'm hoping they say yes.

And they're simple ideas. They're the kinds of things that in the past have been supported by Democrats and Republicans. These are traditionally ideas that have had bipartisan support. They won't have as big of an impact as rebuilding our infrastructure or helping states hire back teachers, but together all of these ideas will do two things. They'll grow the economy faster; they'll grow more jobs.

So today I'm announcing a handy little to-do list that we've put together for Congress.



You can see it for yourselves at whitehouse.gov. It's about the size of a Post-It note, so every member of Congress should have time to read it.



And they can glance at it every so often. Hopefully, we'll just be checking off the list. just like when Michelle gives me a list, I check it off.



Each of the ideas on this list will help accelerate our economy and put people back to work, not in November, not in next year, but right now. All right. So I'm going to go through the list.

First, Congress needs to help the millions of Americans who have worked hard, made their mortgage payments on time, but still have been unable to refinance their mortgages with these historically low rates.



This would make a huge difference for the economy.



Families could save thousands of dollars, and that means they've got more money in their pocket, which means they can either build their equity back up on their homes or they go out and use that money to do things like helping their kids finance a college education. So Congress should give those responsible homeowners a chance to refinance at a lower rate. We estimate they'd save at least $3,000 a year, so that's on our to-do list. It's not complicated.



Second -- second, if Congress fails to act soon, clean-energy companies will see their taxes go up, and they could be forced to lay off employees. In fact, we're already hearing from folks who produce wind turbines and solar panels and a lot of this green energy that, you know, they're getting worried because there's uncertainty out there. Congress hasn't renewed some of the tax breaks that are so important to this industry.

And since I know that the other side in Congress have promised they'll never raise taxes as long as they live, this is a good time to keep that promise when it comes to businesses that are putting Americans to work and helping break our dependence on foreign oil.

 So -- so we should extend these tax credits. That's on the to-do list. That's number two.

Number three, Congress should help small-business owners by giving them a tax break for hiring more workers and paying them higher wages.



You know, we -- we believe small businesses are the engine of economic growth in this country. We should not hold them to a situation where they may end up having to pay higher taxes just by hiring more workers. We should make it easier for them to succeed. So that's on our to-do list. That's number three.

Number four, Congress should help our veterans returning from Iraq and Afghanistan find a good job once they come home.



Our men and women in uniform have served this country with such honor and distinction, and a lot of them come from upstate New York. Now it's our turn to serve them. So we should create a Veterans Job Corps that helps them find work as cops and firefighters, employees at our National Parks. That's on our to-do list.

Then, the last item, the fifth item, which bears especially on what's going on here, the last item on our congressional to-do list is something that will help a lot of you in particular. You know better than anybody that technology has advanced by leaps and bounds over the last few decades. And that's -- that's a great thing. Businesses are more productive; consumers are getting better products for less.

But technology's also made a lot of jobs obsolete. Factories where people once thought they'd retire suddenly left town. Jobs that provided a decent living got shipped overseas. And the result's been a lot of pain for a lot of communities and a lot of families.

There is a silver lining in all this, though. After years of undercutting the competition, now it's getting more expensive to do business in places like China. Wages are going up. Shipping costs are going up. And meanwhile, American workers are getting more and more efficient. Companies located here are becoming more and more competitive. So for a lot of businesses, it's now starting to make sense to bring jobs back home. And here...



Here in the tri-city area, you've got companies like IBM and GlobalFoundries that could have decided to pack up and move elsewhere, but they chose to stay in upstate New York because it made more sense to build here and to hire here. You had more to offer. Got some of the best workers in the world. You've got an outstanding university. Now I want what's happening in Albany to happen all across the country, in places like Cleveland, in Pittsburgh, in Raleigh.



I want to create more opportunities for hard-working Americans to start making things again and selling them all over the world, stamped with those proud words, "Made in America." That's the goal. So...



The good news is, we're already starting to see it happen. American manufacturers are creating jobs for the first time since the late 1990s. And that's good for you, but it's also good for the businesses that supply the materials you use. It's good for the construction workers who build the facilities you work in. It's good for communities, where people are buying more houses and spending more money at restaurants and stores. Everybody benefits when manufacturing is going strong.

So you've heard about outsourcing. Today, more and more companies are insourcing. One recent study found that half of America's largest companies are thinking of moving their manufacturing operations from China back to the United States of America. That's -- that's good news.



Because even when we can't make things cheaper than other countries because of their wage rates, we can always make them better. That's who we are. That's what America's all about.



So this brings me back to our to-do list. What we need to do now is to make it easier for more companies to do the right thing. And one place to start is our tax code. At the moment, companies get tax breaks for moving factories, jobs, and profits overseas. They can actually end up saving on their tax bill when they make the move.

Meanwhile, companies that choose to stay here are getting hit with one of the highest tax rates in the world. That doesn't make sense. And politicians from both parties have been talking about changing it for years, so I've put forward my own plan to make it right in the long term.

But in the short term, before we completely rework the tax code, before we've done a full-blown tax reform, at the very least what we can do right away is stop rewarding companies who ship jobs overseas and use that money to cover moving expenses for companies that are moving jobs back here to America. So we're putting that on Congress's to-do list.



This should-- this is something simple to do. We shouldn't wait. We should get it done right now. So that's the fifth item. That's all on our to-do list. I'm -- I'm not trying to overload Congress here.



So over the next few weeks, I'm going to be talking about this to-do list when I'm on the road. I'm going to be talking about all the things that Congress can do right now to boost our economy and accelerate even more job growth.

Of course, it's not enough just to give them the list. We've also got to get them to start crossing things off the list. And that's where all of you come in. I'm going to need you to pick up the phone, write an e-mail, tweet, remind your member of Congress we can't afford to wait until November to get things done. Tell them now is the time to help more Americans save money on their mortgages, time for us to invest more in clean-energy and small businesses, it's time for us to help more veterans find work, and it's time to make it easier for companies to bring jobs back to America. It's the right thing to do.

Now, I'm cheating a little bit. I said that was my to-do list. There actually is one other thing they've got to do. Before they do anything else, Congress needs to keep student loan rates from doubling for students who are here and all across the country.



That has to happen by January 1st, or rates on Stafford loans double. These young people are nodding their heads. They don't like that; they've heard about this. And we need to pass a transportation bill that guarantees almost a million construction workers can stay on the job. So...



... the good news is both parties say they want to make this happen. We've done this before, so Congress just needs to work out the details. Don't let politics get in the way. Get this done before July 1st. Those bills should be passed right now.

So I'm cheating a little bit. There are actually seven items on the to-do list. But two of them are old business, and folks have already said they want to get them done.

Albany, we've got a long way to go if we're going to make sure everybody who wants a job can find one and every family can feel that sense of security that was the essence of America's middle-class experience. But we can't just go back to the way things used to be. We've got to move forward to an economy where everybody gets a fair shot, everybody's doing their fair share, everybody plays by the same set of rules.

And that's what you guys are doing here in Albany. You're investing in your future. You're not going backwards; you're going forward. With your help, I know we can get there, because here in America, we don't give up, we keep moving, we look out for one another, we pull each other up. That's who we are. And if we work together with common purpose, I've got no doubt we can keep moving this country forward and remind the world just why it is the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth.

Thank you so much, everybody. God bless you. God bless America.

And if Kendall hadn't gotten hurt, you know, who knows where we might have been. I saw McAdoo, by the way, at the airport. He came and said hello, which I was excited.

So I just want you to know, I have faith in you guys. Now it's always good to begin with easy applause lines, talk about the tar heels. But, the reason I came to Chapel Hill today is to talk about what most of you do here every single day. And that's study. I assume.



Higher education is the single most important investment you can make in your future.



So I'm proud of all of you for doing what it takes to make that investment. For the long hours in the library, I hope, in the lab, in the classroom. This has never been more important. Whether you're here at a four-year college or university or you're at a two-year community college, in today's economy, there is no greater predictor of individual success than a good education.



Right now the unemployment rate for Americans with a college degree or more is about half the national average. The incomes of folks with a college degree are twice as high as those who don't have a high school diploma. A higher education is the clearest path in to the middle class.

Now, I know that those of you who are about to graduate are wondering about what's in store for your future. Not even four years ago just as the global economy was about to enter into freefall you were still trying to find your way around campus, and you've spent your years here at a time when the whole world has been trying to recover, but has not yet fully recovered from the worst economic crisis since the great depression. The worst economic crisis in most of our lifetimes, and that includes your teachers.

Our businesses have added more than 4 million jobs over the past two years, but we all know there's still too many Americans out there looking for work, or trying to find a job that pays enough to cover the bills and makes the mortgage. And we still have too many folks in the middle class that are searching for that security that started slipping away years before the recession hit. So we've still got a lot of work to do to rebuild this economy so that it lasts. So that it's solid, so it's firm. But what I want you to know is that the degree you earn from UNC will be the best tool you have to achieve that basic American promise, the idea that if you work hard, you can do well enough to raise a family and own a home, send your own kids to college, put a little away for retirement.



That American dream is within your reach. And there's another part of this dream, which is the idea that each generation is going to know a little bit more opportunity than the last generation. That our kids -- I can tell you now as a parent, and I guarantee you your parents feel this about you, nothing's more important than your kids' success. You want them to do better than you did. You want them to shoot higher, strive more, and succeed beyond your imagination.

So, keeping that promise alive is the defining issue of our time. I don't want this to be a country where a shrinking number of Americans are doing really, really well but a growing number of people are just struggling to get by. That's not my idea of America.



I don't want that future for you, I don't want that future for my daughters; I want this forever to be a country where everybody gets a fair shot and everybody is doing their fair share, and everybody is playing by the same set of rules.



That's the America I know and love. That's the America within our reach. I think back to my grandfather. He had a chance to go to college because this country decided every returning veteran of World War II should be able to afford it, should be able to go to college.



My mother was able to raise two kids by herself because she was able to get grants and work her way through school.



I am only standing here today, Michelle is only who she is today, because -- because of scholarships and student loans. That gave us a shot at a great education. We didn't come from families of means. But we knew that if we worked hard we'd have a shot. This country has always made a commitment to put a good education within the reach of all who are willing to work for it. That's what makes us special. That's what made us an economic superpower, that's what kept us at the forefront of business, and science, and technology and medicine and that's a commitments we have to reaffirm today in 2012.



Now, everybody will give lip service to this. You'll hear a lot of folks say yes, education is important, it's important. But -- but it requires not just words but deeds. And the fact is that since most of you were born, tuition and fees at America's colleges have more than doubled. And that forces students like you to take out a lot more loans, there are fewer grants, you rack up more debt. Can I get an amen.

Now, the average student who borrows to pay for college now graduates with about $25,000 in student loan debt. That's the average. Some are more. Can I get an amen for that.

I know. Because some folks have more debt than that. Americans now owe more on their student loans than they do on their credit cards. And living with that kind of debt means that this generation's not getting off to the same start that the previous generations because you're already loaded up with debt. So that means you've got to make pretty tough choices when you are first starting out. You might have to put off buying a house. It might mean that you can't go after that great idea for a start-up that you have because you're still paying off loans. Maybe you've got to wait longer to start a family or save for retirement.

When a big chunk of every paycheck goes toward loan debt that's not just tough on you, that's not just tough for middle-class families, it's not just tough on your parents; it's painful for the economy. Because -- because that money is not going to help businesses grow. I mean, think about the sooner you can start buying a house, that's good for the housing industry. The sooner you can start up that business, that means you're hiring some folks, that grows the economy. And this is something Michelle and I know about firsthand. I just want everybody here to understand, this is not -- I didn't just read about this.



I didn't just -- I didn't just get some talking points about this. I didn't just get a policy briefing on this. Michelle and I, we've been in your shoes. Like I said we didn't come from wealthy families. So when we graduated from college and law school we had a mountain of debt. When we married we got poor together.



We added up our assets and there were no assets.



And we added up our liabilities and there were a lot of liabilities, basically in the form of student loans. We paid more in student loans than we paid on our mortgage when we finally did buy a condo for the first eight years of our marriage. We were paying more in student loans than what we were paying for our mortgage. So we know what this is about. And we were lucky to land good jobs with a steady income.

But we only finished paying off our student loans, check this out, I'm the president of the United States. 

We -- we only finished paying off our student loans about eight years ago. That wasn't that long ago. And that wasn't easy, especially because when we had Malia and Sasha, we're supposed to be saving up for their college educations, and we're still paying off our college educations.

So, we have to make college more affordable for our young people. That's the bottom line.



And like I said. Look, not everybody's going to go to a four- year college or university. You may go to a community college, you may go to a technical school and get into the workforce, and then it may turn out that after you've had kids and you're 35 you go back to school because you're retraining for something new. But no matter what it is, no matter what field you're in, you're going to have to engage in life-long learning. That's the nature of the economy today, and we've got to make sure that's affordable. That's good for the country; it's good for you.

At this make-or-break moment for the middle class, we've got to make sure that you're not saddled with debt before you even get started in life.



Because I believe college isn't just one of the best investments you can make in your future; it's one of the best investments America can make in our future.



This is important for all of us. We can't price the middle class out of a college education, not at a time when most new jobs in America will require more than a high school diploma. Whether it's at a 4-year college or 2-year program we can't make college education a luxury. Every American family should be able to afford it.

So that's why I'm here. Now, before I ask for your help. I've got very something specific I'm going to need you to do. But North Carolina indulge me -- I want to briefly tell what you we've already done to help make college more affordable, because we've done a lot.

Before I took office we had a student loan system where tens of billions of taxpayer dollars were going to banks, not students. They were processing student loan programs, except the student loans were federally guaranteed so they weren't taking any big risks, but they were still taking billions of dollars out of the system. So we changed it. Some in Washington fought tooth and nail to protect the status quo, where billions of dollars were going to banks instead of students. They wanted to protect that, keep those dollars flowing to the banks. One of them said, I'm going to quote here, it gives you a sense of the attitude sometimes we're dealing with in Washington. They said, it would be an outrage if we change the system so that the money wasn't going through banks and they weren't making billions of dollars of profits off of it. Said it was an outrage. And I said no, the real outrage is letting these banks keep these subsidies without taking risks while students are working two or three jobs just to get by. That's an outrage.



So, we kept at it. We kept at it. We won that fight. Today, that money is going where it should be going, should have been going in the first place. It's going directly to students; we're bypassing the middle man. That means we can raise Pell grants to a higher level, more people are eligible, more young people are able to afford college because of what we did.



Over 10 years that's going to be $60 billion that's going to students that wasn't going to students before.



Then last fall I acted to cap student loan payments faster so nearly 1.6 million students who make their payments on time will only have to pay 10 percent of their monthly income toward loans once they graduate.



Now this is useful -- this is especially helpful for young people who decide, like Dominique  to become teachers, or maybe go into one of the -- social work or one of the helping professions. And they may not get paid a lot of money but they've got a lot of debt. So being able to cap how much per month you're paying as a percentage of income gives you a little bit more security knowing you can choose that profession.

And then we wanted every student to have access to a simple fact sheet on student loans and financial aid. So you can have all of the information you need to make your own choices about how to pay for college. And we set up this new consumer watchdog called the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.



And so they're now putting out this information, we call it know before you owe. Because sometimes we got surprised by some of this debt that we were racking up. So, that's what we've done. But it's not enough just to increase student aid. We can't keep subsidizing skyrocketing tuition or we'll run out of money.

And college and universities, they have to do their part also to keep college costs down. 

So, I've told Congress to steer federal aid to those schools that keep tuition affordable, that provide good value, that serve their students well. And we've put colleges on notice if you can't stop tuition from going up every year, a lot faster than inflation then funding you get from taxpayers, at least at the federal level, will go down, because we need to push colleges to do better and hold them accountable if they don't.

Now, public universities know well and Governor Perdue knows well, states also have to do their part by making higher education a higher priority in their budgets.



I know that Ben is fighting hard to make tuition affordable for North Carolina families. That's a priority for her. But you know, last year over 40 states cut their higher education spending, and these budget cuts have been among the largest factors in tuition increases at public colleges over the past decade, so we're challenging states to take responsibility. We told them, if you can find new ways to bring down costs of college and make it easier for students to graduate then we'll help you do it.

But I want everybody here, as you're thinking about voting, make sure you know where your state representative and your state senator stand when it comes to funding higher education.



They've got to be responsible, they have got to be accountable, as well to prioritize higher education.

All right. So, helping more families, helping more young people afford a higher education, offering incentives for states and colleges and universities to keep costs down, that's what we've been doing.

Now, Congress has to do their part. They need to extend the tuition tax credit that we put in place back when I came into office. It's saving middle-class families thousands of dollars. Congress needs to safeguard aid for low-income students, like Pell Grants, so that today's freshmen and sophomores know that they will be able to count on it.



That's what Congress has to do. Congress needs to give more young people the chance to earn their way through college by doubling the number of work-study jobs over the next five years. That's what Congress needs to do.

And then there's one specific thing. And now this is where you come in. There's one specific thing that Congress needs to do right now. To prevent the interest rates on student loans, federal student loans, from shooting up and shaking you down. So this is where you come in. I want to explain this. So everybody listen carefully. Five years ago, Congress cut the rate on federal student loans in half. That was a good thing to do. But on July 1st, that's a little over two months from now, that rate cut expires. And if Congress does nothing, the interest rates on those loans will double overnight.

So, I'm assuming a lot of people here have federal student loans. The interest rates will double unless Congress acts by July 1st. And just to give you some sense of perspective, for each year that Congress doesn't act, the average student with these loans will rack up an additional $1,000 in debt. An extra $1,000. That's basically a tax hike for more than 7 million students across America. More than 160,000 students here in North Carolina alone.

Anybody here can afford to pay an extra $1,000 right now? I didn't think so.

So, stopping this from happening should be a no-brainer. Helping more of our young people afford college, that should be at the forefront of America's agenda; it shouldn't be a Republican or a Democratic issue.



This is an American issue.

 You know, the Stafford Loans we're talking about, they are named after a Republican senator. The Pell Grants that helped millions of Americans earn a college education, that's named after a Democratic senator. When Congress cut those rates five years ago, 77 Republicans in the House of Representatives voted for it. Along with a couple of hundred Democrats, including the Democrats who are here.



so this shouldn't be a partisan issue. And yet the Republicans who run Congress right now have not yet said whether or not they'll stop your rates from doubling. We're two months away. Some have hinted that they'd only do it if we cut aid for low-income students instead.

So the idea will be, well all right, we'll keep interest rates low if we take away from other students who need it. That's -- one Republican Congresswoman said because, you know, I know you guys will think I'm making it up.



No, no, no. She said -- she had very little tolerance for people who tell me they graduate with debt because there's no reason for that. I'm just quoting here. I'm just quoting. She said, students who rack up student loan debt are just sitting on their butts having opportunity dumped in your lap. I'm reading it here, so I didn't make this up.

Now, can you imagine saying something like that? Those of you who've had to take out student loans; you didn't do it because you're lazy. You didn't do it lightly. You don't like debt. A lot of you, your parents are helping out, but it's tough on them. They're straining. And so you do it because the cost of college keeps going up and you know there's an investment in your future.

So those folks in Washington were serious about making college more affordable. They wouldn't have voted for a budget that could cut financial aid for tens of millions of college students by more than $1,000.

They certainly wouldn't let your student loan rates double overnight. So when you're asking, why aren't you making this commitment in they said, oh, we have to bring down the deficit. Of course this is the deficit they helped run up over the past decade.



Didn't pay for two wars. Didn't pay for two massive tax cuts. And now this is the reason why you want students to pay more? They just voted to keep giving billions of dollars in taxpayer subsidies to Big Oil companies that are raking in record profits.

They just voted to let millionaires and billionaires keep paying lower tax rates than middle-class workers and their secretaries.

They even voted to give an average tax cut of at least $150,000 to folks like me, the wealthiest Americans, a tax cut paid for by cutting things like education, and job training programs, that gives students new opportunities to succeed.

Now, that's their priorities and that doesn't make any sense. Do we want to keep tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans who don't need them and didn't ask for them, or do we want to make sure they're paying their fair share?



Do we want to keep subsidizing Big Oil, or do we want to make sure we're investing in clean energy? Do we want to jack up interest rates on millions of students, or do we want to keep investing in things that will help us and help them in the long term, things like education and science, and a strong military and care for our veterans? We can't do both, we can't have it both ways. We've got to make a choice about what our priorities are.

You know, I said this before but I am just going to keep on repeating it. In America we admire success. We aspire to it. I want everybody to be rich. I want everybody to work, and hustle and start businesses, study your tails off to get there. But America is not just about a few people doing well. America is about giving everybody a chance to do well. Everybody. Not just a few. Everybody.



That's what built this country. That's what the American dream is all about. A lot of us have parents or grandparents who said, maybe I can't go to college, but maybe someday my son, he'll go to college and I'll be so proud of him. A lot of us have parents or grandparents who said, maybe I can't start my own business, but maybe someday my daughter, she's going to start her own business, she's going to work for herself. A lot of us have parents or grandparents who said, I may be be an immigrant but I believe that this is a country where no matter what you look like and where you come from, no matter what your name is, you can make it if you try.



North Carolina, that's who we are. That's our value. That's what we're about. So, no, set your sights lower. That's not an education plan. You're on your own. That's not an economic plan. We can't just cut our way to prosperity. Previous generations made the investments necessary for us to succeed, to build a strong middle class, to create the foundation for America's leadership in science, and technology, and medicine and manufacturing. And now it's our turn. We've got to do the right thing.

I want you to discover the cure for cancer, or the formula for fusion or the next game-changing American industry. And that means we've got to -- we've got to support those efforts.

So if you agree with me, I need your help. I need you to tell your member of Congress, we're not going to set our sights lower. We're not going to settle for something less. Now, all of you are lucky. You already have Congressmen who are onboard. So you don't need to call them.



They're already doing the right thing. But I'm asking everyone else who's watching or following online, call your member of Congress. E-mail them, write on their Facebook page, tweet them. We got a hash tag. Here's the hash tag for you to tweet them. #don'tdoublemyrate. #don'tdoublemyrate.



I'm going to repeat that. The hashtag is #don'tdoublemyrate. You tweet -- everybody say it, just so everybody remembers.

#don'tdoublemyrate. It's pretty straightforward.

Your voice matters, so stand up, be heard, be counted. Tell them, now is not the time to double interest rates on your student loans. Now is the time to double down on smart investments to build a strong and secure middle class. Now is the time to double down on building an America that lasts.

Absolutely. You and me, all of us here, every single one of us, we're here because somebody, somewhere, felt a responsibility not just for themselves, but they felt a responsibility for something larger. You know, it started with them feeling responsible for their families. So your parents sacrificed, your grandparents sacrificed to make sure you could succeed. But then they thought bigger than that. They thought about their neighborhood. They thought about their community. They thought about their country.

Now, they thought about the planet. And now it's our turn to be responsible. It's our turn to keep that promise alive. And no matter how tough these times have been. No matter how many obstacles that may stand in our way, I promise you, North Carolina, there are better days ahead. We will emerge stronger than we were before because I believe in you. I believe in your future. I believe in the investment you're making right here in North Carolina. That tells me that you share my faith in America's future, and that's what drives me every single day -- your hope, your dreams. And I'm not quitting now because in America we don't quit. We get each other's back. We help each other get ahead.

And if we work together we'll remind the world just why it is that America's the greatest nation on earth.

Thank you, everybody! God bless you!

And I want to thank all of you for coming. You know, I came here for a simple reason, an economy that's still recovering from the worst financial crisis and the worst economic crisis of our lifetimes, the work that's going on here could not be more important.

Now I meet business owners all the time who want to hire in the United States, but they can't always find the workers with the right skills. You've got growing industries in science and technology that have twice as many openings as we have workers who can do the job.

Now that makes no sense, openings at a time when there's still a lot of Americans, including some on this stage, who are looking for work. So we've got to do a better job training more people for the skills the businesses are looking for.

When I met with manufacturers a while back, they said it's starting to make economic sense to bring jobs back to Ohio, to bring jobs back to Michigan, to bring jobs back to Illinois and Iowa and Indiana, because even if labor costs are lower there, the workers are better here.

And when you factor in transportation costs, a lot of times it makes sense to insource now, but that's only going to be true if we can make sure that we've got workers who have higher skills and can manage fancier machinery than folks in other places.

And all that starts with community colleges like this one. So I just had a chance to listen to four of your classmates and hear a little bit about how they got here, where they're headed. I talked to Duane  lost her job as an H.R. analyst, but she's now getting certified in the fast-growing field of electronic medical records.

David, who in addition to being a truck driver for 23 years, was also a Marine. So we know he can do the job. He's here to retrain for a higher-paying job. And you just heard from Bronson , who was laid off two years ago.

And you heard what he said. He was in a dead end in his life. And this program, along with his wife --



 -- gave him an opportunity. So he's going to be learning hands-on machining over the next few weeks after having already done some of the book work.

And I have to tell you, when I meet these folks, these folks inspire me, because a lot of them have gone through tough times. Andrea is still dealing with the aftermath of the flood that damaged her home. All of them have supported family members.

And, you know, it's hard being out of work. It's hard especially when you're mid-career when you're having to change jobs. And the resilience they show and the determination they show, that's what America is about, that's our defining spirit. We don't quit. And so the question now is, how do we make sure that all of America is expressing that spirit through making sure that everybody is getting a fair shot? Because that's going to be a major debate that we have in this country, not just for the next few months, but for the next few years.

Should we settle for an economy where a few people do really well and then a growing number are struggling to get by?

Or do we build an economy where people like Duane , they've got a chance to get ahead, where there are ladders of opportunity, where everybody gets a fair shot and everybody does their fair share and everybody is playing by the same set of rules?



And this is not just another run-of-the-mill political debate. There's always chatter in Washington. You know, folks argue about whether the sun rises in the east and whether it sets in the west, whether the sky is blue. There's always going to be arguments in Washington.

But this one is different because we're talking about the central challenge of our time. Right now we have two competing visions of our future. And the choice could not be clearer. Now let me say, those folks on the other side, I am sure they're patriots, I'm sure they're sincere in terms of what they say, but their theory, I believe, is wrong.

See, I've never believed the government can or should try to solve every problem we've got. I believe that the free market is the greatest force for economic progress in human history. I agree that everybody has personal responsibility for their own lives. Everybody's got to work hard, nothing is ever handed to us.

But I also agree with our first Republican president, a guy named Abraham Lincoln, who said that, through government, we should be able to do together what we can't do as well on our own. There's some thing we don't do well on our own.

That's why we've got a strong military to keep us safe. That's why we have fire departments, because we never know when we might have a fire in our house. That's why we've got public schools to educate our children. That's how we laid railroads and highways and supported research and technology that's saved lives and helped create entire industries.

That's why we have programs like Medicare and Social Security and unemployment insurance, because any one of us, I don't care how lucky you are, how rich you are, how blessed you are, you never know, you could face a layoff or a crippling illness or a run of bad luck or a tragedy. Folks in Ohio know about that. Nothing is given.

And that's why with we're helping more community colleges like this one to become community college centers, so folks who are looking for a new job or a better paying job can learn the skills that businesses need right now. And that's good for all of us.

 Investing in a community college just like investing in a new road or a new highway, or broadband lines that go into rural communities, these investments are not part of some grand scheme to redistribute wealth.

They've been made by Democrats and Republicans for generations, because they benefit all of us. That's what leads to strong, durable economic growth. That's how America became a economic superpower. That's how we built the Transcontinental Railroad. That's why we've got the best universities and colleges in the world.

That's why we have cutting-edge research that takes place here. And that then gets translated into new jobs and new businesses, because somebody did the groundwork. We created a foundation for those of us to prosper. Somebody gave me an education. I wasn't born with a silver spoon in my mouth. Michelle wasn't. But somebody gave us a chance.

Just like these folks up here are looking for a chance. When you take classes at a community college like this one, and you learn the skills that you need to get a job right away, that does not just benefit you. It benefits the company that ends up hiring and profiting from your skills. It makes the entire region stronger economically. It makes this country stronger economically.

In this country, prosperity does not trickle down. Prosperity grows from the bottom up, and it grows from a strong middle class out.



 That's how we grow this economy.

And that's why I'm always confused when we keep having the same argument with folks who don't seem to remember how America was built.

They keep telling us, well, if we just weaken regulations that keep our air and water clean and protect our consumers, if we just cut everybody's taxes and convert these investments in community colleges and research and health care into tax cuts, especially for the wealthy, that somehow the economy is going to get stronger. And Ohio and the rest of the country will prosper. That's the theory.

Ohio, we tested this theory. Take a look at what happened in Ohio between 2000 and 2008. It's not like we didn't try it. And instead of faster job growth, we had the slowest job growth in half a century. Instead of broad-based prosperity, the typical American family saw their incomes fall by about 6 percent.

Outsourcing, rampant. Phony financial profits all over the place. And instead of strengthening our economy, our entire financial system almost collapsed. We spent the last 31/2 years cleaning up after that mess.

So their theory did not work out so well. Maybe they haven't been paying attention, but it didn't work out so well. And instead of kind of stepping back and saying to themselves, well, maybe this didn't work so maybe should try something different, they decided to double down.



 Instead of moderating their views even slightly, you now have Republicans in Washington, the ones running for president, proposing budgets that shower the wealthiest Americans with even more tax cuts. Folks like me don't need them. We're looking for them.

And when you give somebody like me a tax cut, there's only two ways of paying for it. Either it adds to our deficit, meaning it's not paid for, or you end up -- which is what they proposed, gutting investments in education and medical research and clean energy and job training programs like this one.

If these cuts are spread out evenly, then 10 million college students, including some of you, would see your financial aid cut by an average more than $1,000 each. Thousands of medical research grants for things like Alzheimer's and cancer and AIDS would be eliminated.

Our investments in clean energy that are helping to break our dependence on foreign oil and are creating jobs here in Ohio would be cut by nearly a fifth. By the time you retire, Medicare would be turned into a voucher system that likely would not cover the doctors and the care that you need. That would have to come out of your pocket.

Job training programs like this one would be forced to cut back. Thousands of Americans would lose out on critical employment and training services. That's the truth. When you ask the Republicans, well, what do you say about that, they say, well, now, Obama is making this up because we didn't specify which cuts we would make.

Well, they -- the reason they didn't specify it is because they know folks wouldn't like it. But if you have got to cut a certain amount of money, and they've already said they're not going to cut defense spending, and they're going with their tax cuts, then you've got to go to all the other stuff that's left over or you're going to add to the deficit. That's just math. That's not theorizing on my part.

They'll tell you, well, we've got to do this because the deficit's so bad. The deficit is bad. We've got to deal with the deficit in a serious way, and that means all of us are going to have to make tough choices. But it's one thing to deal with the deficit in a way that is fair and asks everybody to do their fair share and -- dealing with the deficit is an excuse to do what you want to anyway.

Their argument might fly if it weren't for the fact that they're also proposing to spend $4.6 trillion on lower tax rates on top of the $1 trillion they would spend on tax cuts for people making $250,000 a year or more. That's their priority. They want to give me more of a tax break. Now, I just paid taxes, so I -- you know, I'm -- it's not like I love paying taxes.



 But I, you know, I can afford it. I don't need another tax break. Right now, companies can't find enough qualified workers for the jobs they need to fill. So programs like this are training hundreds of thousands of workers with the skills that companies are looking for, and it is working and it is going to help America grow. I have seen it.

Here in Lorraine County 90 percent of the people who graduate from this program have a job three months later, 90 percent.



 That's a big deal. Why would we want to cut this program to give folks like me a tax cut that we don't need and that the country can't afford? What's the better way to make our economy stronger? Give more tax breaks to every millionaire and billionaire in the country or make investments in education and research and health care and job training?

Make investments in Bronson  and put folks back to work? This is just common sense.

Understand this is not a redistribution argument. This is not about taking from rich people to give to poor people. This is about us together making investments in our country so everybody has got a fair shot. And that will make all of us better off.



 Now, on Monday, nearly every Republican in the Senate voted to block what's called the Buffett rule. Think about this. The Buffett rule says if you make a million dollars or more -- I am not saying you got a million dollars.

Let's say you're a small business person and you saved, you worked and after 10, 20, 30 years of working you finally saved up your little nest egg. That's not what I am talking about.

I am saying you make a million dollars a year. And we said you should at least pay the same percentage in income tax as middle class families do.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE: Right.

 As a teacher or a bus driver or --



 And by doing that, that helps us afford being able to say to the 98 percent of families who make $250,000 a year or less, your taxes won't go up. This is an idea that was supported by a strong majority of the American people, including nearly half of Republicans. Majority of millionaires supported it.

And Senate Republicans didn't listen. They refused to even let it come up for a vote. Refused to ask the wealthiest among us to do their fair share.

Meanwhile, Republicans in the House just signaled their willingness to gut programs like this one that make a real difference in people's lives, thousands of middle class families, or folks who are trying to get into the middle class. And my point is the middle class has sacrificed enough over the last few decades. They're having enough trouble.



 You know, and as I travel around the country, people aren't just concerned about their immediate circumstances. They're also concerned about our future. They're thinking, how do we make sure that America stays ahead? How do we make sure that if somebody is willing to work hard they can get ahead in this country?

And people understand, you know, government is not all the answer and if they see taxpayer money wasted, that makes them angry. They know the government has got to be lean and mean and do smart things, but they also understand we can't stop investing in the things that are going to create real lasting growth in this country.

And we certainly can't do it just as an excuse to give me another tax cut. That's not who we are as a country. We're better than that. Everybody here, we're here because somebody somewhere felt a sense of larger responsibility, not just to themselves, to their family first of all, but then also to their community, also to their country. Maybe they served like David .

Maybe they, worked in a local charity. They understood, like my grandparents understood, like my mother understood, like Michelle's parents understood, you know, we do what we do not just for ourselves but also for this larger project we call America. And now it is our turn to be responsible. Now it is our turn to make sure the next generation has the same opportunities that we do.

And I know we can do it. The reason I know is because of the folks I had a chance to meet. It is because of you. You're working hard. You haven't given up. You have gone through some struggles, but you're resilient.

Ohio is a great example of the core strength and decency of the American people. You believe in our future. You believe in this country. And if we work together in common purpose, I guarantee you we will make this an American century just like the 20th century was the American century. Thank you. God bless you. God bless America.

 Thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you, everybody. Thank you.

Everybody, please, please, have a seat. Thank you. 

Thank you very much. Thank you. Everybody sit down, sit down.

You know, I was going to head over here earlier, and they said, "No, no, this place is full of women and they're still settling down."



Said, "What do you mean, settling down? What are they -- what are they doing over there?" Just -- just creating havoc.

Welcome to the White House, everybody.

It is a pleasure to be surrounded by so many talented, accomplished women. It makes me feel right at home. Although usually I've got my wingman Bo with me.



I want to thank everybody who's made this Forum on Women and the Economy possible. I thank Mika for helping moderate today and proving that -- on your show every morning, that women really are the better half.



Now, Joe's not denying it.



He's not denying it.

I want to thank the members of my Cabinet and administration who are participating today.

And I want to thank all of you who've come today lending your time and your energy to the critical cause of broadening opportunity for America's women.

Now, right now no issue is more important than restoring economic security for all our families in the wake of the greatest economic crisis since the Great Depression.

 That begins with making sure that everyone who wants a job has one. So we welcome today's news...



We welcome today's news that our businesses created another 121,000 jobs last month and the unemployment rate ticked down. Our economy's now created more than 4 million private sector jobs over the past two years, and more than 600,000 in the past three months alone.

But it's clear to every American that there will still be ups and downs along the way, and that we've got a lot more work to do. And that includes addressing challenges that are unique to women's economic security, challenges that have been around since long before the recession hit.

That's why one of the first things I did after taking office was to create a White House Council on Women and Girls. I wanted to make sure that every agency across my administration considers the needs of women and girls in every decision we make.

And today, we're releasing a report on women in the economy that looks at women's economic security through all stages of life, from young women, furthering their education and beginning their careers, to working women who create jobs and provide for their families, to seniors in retirement or getting ready for retirement.

There's been a lot of talk about women and women's issues lately, as there should be. But I do think that the conversation's been oversimplified.

 Women are not some monolithic bloc. Women are not an interest group.



You shouldn't be treated that way.



Women are over half this country and its workforce, not to mention 80 percent of my household if you count my mother-in-law.



And I always count my mother-in-law.



Every decision made by those of us in public life impacts women just as much as men. And this report you all have explains some of what we've done to try to lift up the lives of women and girls in this country. But I'd like to spend some time talking about why we've done what we've done.

For me, at least, it begins with the women who shaped my life. I grew up the son of a single mom who struggled to put herself through school and make ends meet. Had to rely on food stamps at one point to get us by.

But she earned her education. She made it through with scholarships and hard work. And my sister and I earned our degrees because of her motivation and her support and her impact.

 I told this story before: She used to wake me up before dawn when I was living overseas, making sure that I was keeping up with my American education. And when I'd complain, she'd let loose with, "This is no picnic for me either, buster."



And that's part of the reason why my sister chose to become a teacher.

When my mom needed help with us, my grandmother stepped up. My grandmother had a high school education. My grandfather got to go to college on the G.I. Bill. My grandmother wasn't afforded those same opportunities even though she had worked on an assembly line -- a bomber assembly line in World War II.

Nevertheless, she got a job at a local bank. And she was smart and tough and disciplined and she worked hard, and eventually she rose from being a secretary to being vice president at this bank. And I'm convinced she would have been the best president that bank had ever seen if she had gotten the chance.

But at some point she hit the glass ceiling. And for a big chunk of her career she watched other men that she had trained -- younger men that she had trained -- pass her up that ladder.

 And then there's the woman who once advised me at the law firm in Chicago where we met.



Once...



She gave me very good advice. That's why I decided to marry her.



And once Michelle and I had our girls, she gave it her all to balance raising a family and pursuing a career -- and something that could be very difficult on her because I was gone a lot. Once I was in the state legislature, I was teaching, I was practicing law, I'd be traveling, and we didn't have the luxury for her not to work.

And I know when she was with the girls she'd feel guilty that she wasn't giving enough time to her work, and when she was at work she was feeling guilty she wasn't giving enough time to the girls.

And like many of you, we both wished that there were a machine that could let us be in two places at once. And so she had to constantly juggle it and carried an extraordinary burden for a long period of time.

And then finally as a father, one of my highlights of every day is asking my daughters about their day, their hopes and their futures. That's what drives me every day when I step into the Oval Office: thinking about them.

 Every decision I make is all about making sure they, and all our daughters, and all our sons, grow up in a country that gives them the chance to be anything they set their minds to, a country where more doors are open to them than were open to us.

So, when I think about these efforts, when we put together this Council on Women and Girls, this is personal. That's what is at the heart of all our efforts. These are the experiences -- the prism through which I view these efforts.

And that's what we mean when we say that these issues are more than just a matter of policy. And when we talk about these issues that primarily impact women, we've got to realize they are not just women's issues; they are family issues, they are economic issues, they are growth issues, they are issues about American competitiveness, they are issues that impact all of us.

Now, think about it, when women make less than men for the same work, that hurts families who have to get by with less and businesses who have fewer customers with less to spend. When a job doesn't offer family leave to care for a new baby or sick leave to care for an ailing parent, that burden's met as well. When an insurance plan denies women coverage because of preexisting conditions, that puts a strain on emergency rooms, drives up costs of care for everybody.

When any of our citizens can't fulfill the potential that they have because of factors that have nothing to do with talent or character or work ethic, that diminishes us all, it holds all of us back, and -- and -- it -- it says something about who we are as Americans.

 Right now women are a growing number of breadwinners in the household, but they're still earning just 77 cents for every dollar a man does, even less if you're an African-American or Latina woman.

Overall, a woman with a college degree doing the same work as a man will earn hundreds of thousands of dollars less over the course of her career.

So closing this pay gap, ending pay discrimination, is about far more than simple fairness. When more women are bringing home the bacon, but bringing home less of it than men who are doing the same work, that weakens families, it weakens communities, it's tough on our kids, it weakens our entire economy.



Which is why the first bill I signed into law was the Lilly Ledbetter Act -- Fair Pay Act...



... to make it easier for women to demand fairness, equal pay for equal work.

We're pushing for legislation to give women more tools to pay -- to fight pay discrimination. And we've encouraged companies to make workplaces more flexible so women don't have to choose between being a good employee or a good mom.

More women are also choosing to strike out on their own. Today, nearly 30 percent of small-business owners are women. Their businesses generate  $1.2 trillion last year.

 But they're less likely to get the loans that they need to start up or expand or to hire, which means they often have to depend on credit cards and the mounting debt that comes with them.

And that's why, through some outstanding work by Karen Mills and the SBA and other parts of our administration, we've extended more than 16,000 new loans worth $4.5 billion to women-owned businesses...



... not to mention cut taxes for small businesses 17 times, so that more women have the power to create more jobs and more opportunity.

We're also focusing on making sure more women are prepared to fill the good jobs of today and tomorrow. Over the past decade, women have earned well over half of all the higher education degrees awarded in America, but once they get out of college we still have a lot of ground to cover.

Just 3 percent of Fortune 500 CEOs are women. Fewer than 20 percent of the seats in Congress are occupied by women. Is it possible that Congress will get more done if there were more women in Congress?



Is that -- is that fair to say, Joe? I think it's fair to say.

That is -- that is almost guaranteed.



 And while women account for four in five degrees in areas like education -- which is terrific, because obviously there's no profession that is more important than teaching -- we also have to recognize that only two in five business degrees go to women, fewer than one in four engineering and computer science degrees go to women. They make up just 25 percent of the workforce in the science and technical fields.

No unspoken bias or outdated barrier should ever prevent a girl from considering careers in these fields. When creativity is limited or ingenuity is discouraged, that hurts all of us, it denies America the game-changing products and world-changing discoveries we need to stay on top.

We've got to do more to encourage women to join these fields as well, make it easier to afford the education that's required to make it, send a clear message to our daughters -- which I'm doing every night -- math, science, nothing wrong with it, a lot right with it, we need you to focus.

That's why our education reform, Race to the Top, has put a priority on science and technology and engineering and math education. It's rewarded states that took specific steps to ensure that all students, especially under-represented groups like girls, have the opportunity to get excited about these fields at an early age.

And we've helped more than 2.3 million more young women afford to pursue higher education with our increases in the Pell Grants.

 That's good news.



Another example: health reform. It's been in the news lately.



Because of the health reform law that we passed, women finally had more power to make their choices about their health care. Last year...



Last year more than 20 million women received expanded access to preventive services like mammograms and cervical cancer screenings at no additional cost, nearly 2 million...



... nearly 2 million women enrolled in Medicare received a 50 percent discount on the medicine that they need, over 1 million more young women are insured because they can now stay on their parents' plan.

Later this year, women will receive new access to recommended preventive care, like domestic violence screening, and contraception at no additional cost.



And soon insurance companies will no longer be able to deny coverage based on preexisting conditions like breast cancer, or charge women more just because they're women.



We don't know -- we -- we haven't gotten on the dry cleaning thing yet, though. I mean, I know that that's still...



That's still frustrating, I'm sure.



 So when it comes to our efforts on behalf of women and girls, I'm proud of the accomplishments that we can point to.

Yes, we've got a lot more to do, but there's no doubt we've made progress. The policies we've put in place over the past three years have started to take hold. And what we can't do now is go back to the policies that got us into so many of the problems that we've been dealing with in the first place. That's what's at stake.

When people talk about repealing health care reform, they're not just saying we should stop protecting women with preexisting conditions. They're -- they're also saying we should kick about a million young women off their parents' health care plans.

When people say we should get rid of Planned Parenthood, they're not just talking about restricting a woman's ability to make her own health decision. They're talking about denying, as a practical matter, the preventive care like mammograms that millions of women rely on.

When folks talk about doing away with things like student aid that disproportionately help young women, they're not thinking about the cost to our future when millions of young Americans will have trouble affording to go to college.

And when something like the Violence Against Women Act, a bill Joe Biden authored, a bill that once passed by wide bipartisan margins, is suddenly called to question, that makes no sense.

 I -- I don't need to...



That's not something we should still be arguing about.

Now, I don't need to tell anybody here that progress is hard. Change can come slow. Opportunity and equality don't come without a fight. And sometimes you've got to keep fighting even after you've won some victories.



Things don't always move forward. Sometimes they move backward if you're not fighting for them.

But we do know these things are possible. And all of you are proof to that. This incredible collection of accomplished women, you're proof of change.

So is the fact that for the first time in history young girls across the country can see three women sitting on the bench of the highest court of the land.



Or they can read about the extraordinary leadership of a woman who went by the title Madam Speaker. Or they can...



... or they can turn on the news and see that one of the most formidable presidential candidates and senators we ever had is now doing as much as anybody to improve America's standing abroad as one of the best secretaries of state that we've ever known.



And they can see that every single day another 500 women just like yourselves take the helm of their own company right here in America and do their part to grab those doors of opportunity that they walked through and open them just a little bit wider for the next generation.

 So as long as I've got the privilege of being your president, we're gonna keep working every single day to make sure those doors forever stay open and widen the circle of opportunity for all our kids.

Thank you for what you do. Keep it up.

God bless you. God bless the United States of America.

 Thank you. Hello, everybody. Please, please, have a seat.

Good afternoon. I want to thank all of you for coming. And in particular I want to thank the members of Congress who are here today, from both parties, whose leadership and hard work made this bill a reality.

You know, one of the great things about America is that we are a nation of doers; not just talkers, but doers. We think big, we take risks, and we believe that anyone with a solid plan and a willingness to work hard can turn even the most improbable idea into a successful business.

So ours is a legacy of Edisons and Graham Bells, of Fords and Boeings, of Googles and of Twitters. This is a country that's always been on the cutting edge, and the reason is that America has always had the most daring entrepreneurs in the world.

Some of them are standing with me today. When their ideas take root, we get inventions that can change the way we live. And when their businesses take off, more people become employed, because overall new businesses account for almost every new job that's created in America.

Now, because we're still recovering from one of the worst recessions in our history, the last few years have been pretty tough on entrepreneurs.

 Credit's been tight, and no matter how good their ideas are, if an entrepreneur can't get a loan from a bank or banking from investors, it's almost impossible to get their businesses off the ground.

And that's why back in September, and again in my State of the Union, I called on Congress to remove a number of barriers that were preventing aspiring entrepreneurs from getting funding. And this is one useful and important step along that journey.

Here's what's going to happen because of this bill.

For business owners who want to take their companies to the next level, this bill will make it easier for you to go public.

And that's a big deal because going public is a major step towards expanding and hiring more workers. It's a big deal for investors as well, because public companies operate with greater oversight and greater transparency.

And for startups and small businesses, this bill is a potential game changer. Right now, you can only turn to a limited group of investors, including banks and wealthy individuals, to get funding. Laws that are nearly eight decades old make it impossible for others to invest. But a lot's changed in 80 years and it's time our laws did as well.

Because of this bill, startups and small business will now have access to a big new pool of potential investors, namely the American people.

For the first time ordinary Americans will be able to go online and invest in entrepreneurs that they believe in. Of course, to make sure Americans don't get taken advantage of, the websites where folks will go to fund all these startups and small businesses will be subject to rigorous oversight.

 The SEC's gonna play an important role in implementing this bill. And I've directed my administration to keep a close eye as this law goes into effect and to provide me with regular updates.

It also means that to all the members of Congress who are here today I want to say publicly, before I sign this bill, it's gonna be important that we continue to make sure that the SEC is properly funded, just like all our other regulatory and -- agencies, so that they can do the job and make sure that our investors get adequate protections.

This bill represents exactly the kind of bipartisan action we should be taking in Washington to help our economy.

I've always said that the true engine of job creation in this country is the private sector, not the government. Our job is to help our companies grow and hire.

And that's why I pushed for this bill. That's why I now that the bipartisan group here pushed for this bill. That's why I've cut taxes for small businesses over 17 times. That's why every day I'm fighting to make sure America is the best place on Earth to do business.

Our economy's begun to turn a corner, but we've still got a long way to go. We've still got a lot of Americans out there who are looking for a job or looking for a job that pays better than the one that they've got.

And we're going to have to keep working together so that we can keep moving the economy forward. But I've never been more confident about our future, and the reason is because of the American people.

Some of the folks beside me here today are a testimony to that. Day after day they're out there pitching infesters. Some meetings go well; some meetings don't go so well. That's true for me, too.



But no matter what, they keep at it. And who knows? Maybe one of them, or one of the folks in the audience here today, will be the next Bill Gates or Steve Jobs or Mark Zuckerberg.

 And -- and one of them may be the next entrepreneur to turn a big idea into a entire new industry. That's the promise of America. That's what this country's all about.

So if these entrepreneurs are willing to keep giving their all, the least Washington can do is to help them succeed. I plan to do that now by proudly signing this bill.

Thank you very much, everybody.



There we go. It's done.





 All right, everybody, enjoy a great day.

Thank you very much.  Everybody, please have a seat. Sorry we're running just a little bit behind, but I figured it's a great day to enjoy the Rose Garden.

Today, members of Congress have a simple choice to make: They can stand with the big oil companies, or they can stand with the American people.

Right now, the biggest oil companies are raking in record profits -- profits that go up every time folks pull up into a gas station. But on top of these record profits, oil companies are also getting billions a year -- billions a year in taxpayer subsidies -- a subsidy that they've enjoyed year after year for the last century.

Think about that. It's like hitting the American people twice. You're already paying a premium at the pump right now. And on top of that, Congress, up until this point, has thought it was a good idea to send billions of dollars more in tax dollars to the oil industry.

It's not as if these companies can't stand on their own. Last year, the three biggest U.S. oil companies took home more than $80 billion in profits. Exxon pocketed nearly $4.7 million every hour. And when the price of oil goes up, prices at the pump go up, and so do these companies' profits. In fact, one analysis shows that every time gas goes up by a penny, these companies usually pocket another $200 million in quarterly profits. Meanwhile, these companies pay a lower tax rate than most other companies on their investments, partly because we're giving them billions in tax giveaways every year.

Now, I want to make clear, we all know that drilling for oil has to be a key part of our overall energy strategy. We want U.S. oil companies to be doing well. We want them to succeed. That's why under my administration, we've opened up millions of acres of federal lands and waters to oil and gas production. We've quadrupled the number of operating oil rigs to a record high. We've added enough oil and gas pipeline to circle the Earth and then some. And just yesterday, we announced the next step for potential new oil and gas exploration in the Atlantic.

So the fact is, we're producing more oil right now than we have in eight years, and we're importing less of it as well. For two years in a row, America has bought less oil from other countries than we produce here at home -- for the first time in over a decade.

So American oil is booming. The oil industry is doing just fine. With record profits and rising production, I'm not worried about the big oil companies. With high oil prices around the world, they've got more than enough incentive to produce even more oil. That's why I think it's time they got by without more help from taxpayers who are already having a tough enough time paying the bills and filling up their gas tank. And I think it's curious that some folks in Congress, who are the first to belittle investments in new sources of energy, are the ones that are fighting the hardest to maintain these giveaways for the oil companies.

Instead of taxpayer giveaways to an industry that's never been more profitable, we should be using that money to double-down on investments in clean energy technologies that have never been more promising -- investments in wind power and solar power and biofuels; investments in fuel-efficient cars and trucks, and energy-efficient homes and buildings. That's the future. That's the only way we're going to break this cycle of high gas prices that happen year after year after year. As the economy is growing, the only time you start seeing lower gas prices is when the economy is doing badly. That's not the kind of pattern that we want to be in. We want the economy doing well, and people to be able to afford their energy costs.

And keep in mind, we can't just drill our way out of this problem. As I said, oil production here in the United States is doing very well, and it's been doing well even as gas prices are going up. Well, the reason is because we use more than 20 percent of the world's oil but we only have 2 percent of the world's known oil reserves. And that means we could drill every drop of American oil tomorrow but we'd still have to buy oil from other countries to make up the difference. We'd still have to depend on other countries to meet our energy needs. And because it's a world market, the fact that we're doing more here in the United States doesn't necessarily help us because even U.S. oil companies they're selling that oil on a worldwide market. They're not keeping it just for us. And that means that if there's rising demand around the world then the prices are going to up.

That's not the future that I want for America. I don't want folks like these back here and the folks in front of me to have to pay more at the pump every time that there's some unrest in the Middle East and oil speculators get nervous about whether there's going to be enough supply. I don't want our kids to be held hostage to events on the other side of the world.

I want us to control our own destiny. I want us to forge our own future. And that's why, as long as I'm President, America is going to pursue an all-of-the-above energy strategy, which means we will continue developing our oil and gas resources in a robust and responsible way. But it also means that we're going to keep developing more advanced homegrown biofuels, the kinds that are already powering truck fleets across America.

We're going to keep investing in clean energy like the wind power and solar power that's already lighting thousands of homes and creating thousands of jobs. We're going to keep manufacturing more cars and trucks to get more miles to the gallon so that you can fill up once every two weeks instead of every week. We're going to keep building more homes and businesses that waste less energy so that you're in charge of your own energy bills.

We're going to do all of this by harnessing our most inexhaustible resource: American ingenuity and American imagination. That's what we need to keep going. That's what's at stake right now. That's the choice that we face. And that's the choice that's facing Congress today. They can either vote to spend billions of dollars more in oil subsidies that keep us trapped in the past, or they can vote to end these taxpayer subsidies that aren't needed to boost oil production so that we can invest in the future. It's that simple.

And as long as I'm President, I'm betting on the future. And as the people I've talked to around the country, including the people who are behind me here today, they put their faith in the future as well. That's what we do as Americans. That's who we are. We innovate. We discover. We seek new solutions to some of our biggest challenges. And, ultimately, because we stick with it, we succeed. And I believe that we're going to do that again. Today, the American people are going to be watching Congress to see if they have that same faith.

Thank you very much, everybody.

I'm going to work with as much as possible, with as much passion and as much conviction as this little body can muster up --  -- because I completely agree in the man who I'm about to introduce.

When he said he would run I was skeptical, but I wasn't skeptical about what kind of President Barack could be. I was only skeptical about what we could accomplish. And even in the midst of all the back-and-forth and all the rancor, so much has happened in these three and a half years. So much has changed. And so many children will look at this President and see a different set of possibilities for themselves. And that we all know we can't put a price tag on that.

So I'm going to work hard for this President. And with that, I'd like to introduce my husband, your President, Barack Obama. 

B.  Thank you.  Thank you. Thank you so much. Well, it is wonderful to see all of you.

Let me begin my thanking a couple of folks who preceded me. First of all, the most important person, the true star of the Obama family, along with Malia, Sasha and Bo -- the First Lady of the United States, Michelle Obama. 

I also want to thank Mariah Carey for performing this evening. 

So I think the way we're going to do this tonight is I want to actually spend some time in conversation with you, so we're going to do some Q&A later, and I'm going to just give a few brief remarks at the top.

I was in Cleveland earlier today at Cuyahoga Community College. This is obviously a region that has been struggling, not just since 2008, but has been struggling for over a decade. And I described to them what was at stake in this election, and explained that there is one area where I and my opponent completely agree -- and that is that, as important as foreign policy is, as proud as I am to have ended the war in Iraq and made sure that we were providing the resources to go after Al Qaida and take out bin Laden, and the transition that we're working on in getting our troops home from Afghanistan, as important as social issues are, the crux of this campaign is going to be about the economy.

Because when we came together in 2008, part of what compelled me to run and part of what I think brought a lot of people to support me was a belief in a basic bargain that here in America, no matter what you look like, no matter where you come from, no matter who you love, no matter what your faith -- if you are willing to work hard you should be able to make it. Not everybody will experience extraordinary monetary success, but you should be able to find a good job and make a good home, and educate your kids so that they can achieve more than you ever dreamed of, and retire with some dignity and some respect -- the notion that if you show responsibility for yourself and your life, that you can succeed.

And it was that basic bargain that built the greatest middle class in history. It's what made us an economic superpower. It wasn't the idea that the economy grew from the top down; it was the idea that it grew out from the middle -- all kinds of people contributing, coming together, sharing in prosperity -- and sharing in responsibility not only for this generation but for the next generation.

And the sense was in 2008 that we had lost touch with those values and those ideals. We had squandered a surplus and turned it into deficits by giving tax cuts to folks who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them, two wars paid on a credit card. Manufacturing increasingly left our shores. A lot of our economic growth was built on debt and speculation. And we didn't know at the time when I started to run that we would end up with that entire house of cards collapsing, and the result would be the worst financial crisis and the worst economic crisis in our lifetimes.

We've spent three and a half years working diligently -- and when I say "we" I don't just mean my administration; I mean the American people all across this country -- working to recover from that crisis. We've created more than 4 million jobs over the last 27 months -- more jobs than were created in the entire 7 years preceding my presidency -- 800,000 jobs just this year alone. But we lost 9 million jobs.

We rebuilt and gave the opportunity for workers and businesses to begin to rebuild the auto industry, and have started to see manufacturing grow again for the first time since the 1990s. But we lost 6 million jobs in the decade before as manufacturing moved offshore. We were able to stabilize the financial system. But millions of people all across the country saw their homes suddenly lose 10, 20, 30 percent of their value. And so as a consequence, we saw actually more wealth lost in that short span of time than was lost during the Depression.

And so as much as we've done over the last three and a half years, we've got a lot more work to do -- because the hole that was dug was so deep. And what this election is going to come down to is where do we go from here? Because I have a fundamentally different vision about where we need to take this country than my opponent.

And so all the gridlock in Washington, all the stalemate, all the questions as to why, for example, my jobs bill that I proposed that the economists said would create a million jobs hasn't passed, or the $4 trillion in deficit reduction that I proposed hasn't gotten done -- part of it is politics. Part of it is the party that's not in the White House wanting to block a President who's in the White House. But part of it has to do with just a different conception of how we grow the economy.

Mr. Romney and his congressional allies believe that if we not only extend the tax cuts that were passed under the previous administration but also an addition $5 trillion -- giving a lot of folks in this room big tax cuts -- that that will somehow grow the economy faster. That if we strip away regulations on polluters or protections that are offered to consumers or workers, that that will unleash the marketplace. That's the essence of their prescription.

Their analysis is, is that government is the problem, and if we just prune it back to a few basics like national security, and break it up and give it back in the form of tax cuts particularly for the wealthiest Americans that we will grow faster. And they will deliver on that vision if Mr. Romney is elected and Republicans control the Congress.

So I don't necessarily question their sincerity, but I do question their understanding of how we built America. Because throughout most of our postwar era, the way we grew America was understanding that the market was the most powerful wealth generator in history; that we had a entrepreneurial culture, and we rewarded risk-takers and innovators; but we also understood there were some things we had to do together to make sure everybody had a shot, to make sure that everybody did their fair share, to make sure that everybody was playing by the same rules.

And so we created public schools and public universities because we understood all of us would succeed if every talented kid had a chance to get a great education. And, yes, that cost money, and we couldn't do it on our own. We had to do it together.

And we understood that businesses are going to thrive if we've got great infrastructure -- so we built railroads and highways and ports and airports, telecommunications lines, because we recognized that businesses have to move services and goods and information. And the faster we can do it, the more efficiently we can do it, the more all of us benefit.

And we understood that if we invest in science and technology --  That if we invested in science and technology, that wasn't necessarily something that we could do on our own and it might not always be profitable for the private sector, but because of those investments, we laid the foundation for the Internet and GPS and medical breakthroughs, which then the private sector was able to take advantage of and commercialize and create jobs and businesses all across America.

We understood that if we set up some rules of the road for our capital markets, small investors and others would be more likely to put their money in because they figured they weren't getting cheated, which gave us the strongest capital markets in the world. We understood that if we put in place consumer protections and safety standards, that the American brand, our products people would have confidence in. And we couldn't do those things on our own; we had to do them together.

The Hoover Dam, the Golden Gate Bridge, the GI Bill -- those things weren't bad for the marketplace. Those things facilitated the marketplace. It helped create our wealth.

And so in this election, we are going to have a choice: Do we continue with that vision -- which, by the way, used to have adherence not just in the Democratic Party but also in the Republican Party. This used to be a postwar consensus. There would be arguments about how big government, how small government, but there was a basic understanding that there were some things we do better together.

And so the reason I'm running is because I want to continue that tradition. That will provide us the kind of foundation we need to grow.

And you've got on the other side a basic argument that says government is the enemy; the market for everything -- that's the solution to our problems. And I'm not exaggerating here. As I pointed out in my speech today, if you look at what it would mean to provide an additional $5 trillion tax cut, the only way to pay for it without just exploding the deficit would be to cut out 20 percent of that part of the budget that includes education, includes basic research -- just about everything except Medicare, Social Security, national defense would be cut -- 20 percent.

That doesn't get you $5 trillion, though, so you'd then also have to raise taxes in one way or another on the middle class in order to pay for it. And that doesn't deal with the existing deficit; that's just the $5 trillion deficit that would be created if we have these additional tax cuts.

If you roll back the health care bill that we passed, it's estimated that millions of people will not have health insurance, and then millions more if we carry out what's been proposed in terms of cutting Medicaid. Vulnerable kids, kids with autism or disabilities, or folks in nursing homes.

Now, I understand the argument the other side is making. The problem is, is that we tried it just a few years ago. And it was exactly that theory that led to sluggish economic growth, sluggish job growth, huge deficits, and ultimately resulted in a financial crash. So the question is why would we think that it would work now? What evidence do we have that this theory would make sense?

But that's the great thing about democracy -- you can present a plan even if it doesn't make sense.  And you can make your argument for it. But the point I tried to make today -- and this is what we're going to be doing over the next five months -- is I want absolute clarity on the part of the American people about which way we're going.

I believe in making sure that we're investing in clean energy -- in solar and wind -- because I think that will create jobs and I think it's good for our national security, and I think it will reduce our dependence on foreign oil, and I think it's good for climate change. Mr. Romney disagrees. I want to have that debate.

I believe we have to invest in education at the K through 12 level. We're going to reform the system, but we also have to hire new teachers, pay them better, hold them accountable but stop teaching to the test. And, yes, that's going to require some resources. Mr. Romney wants to cut back on those resources. I want to have that debate.

I believe we have to rebuild America, and we should rebuild America right now. We've got trillions of dollars in deferred maintenance that we're going to at some point have to replace unless we intend to become a second-rate power. And we could put thousands of people to work doing it right now here in New York and all across the country. Mr. Romney disagrees. I want to have that debate.

I want to reduce the deficit, but I want to do it in a balanced way. I think everybody should do their fair share and we shouldn't balance it on the backs of folks who are the most vulnerable when we can afford to do a little bit more. Mr. Romney has a different theory, and I want to have that debate.

So let me just close by saying this. Over the next five months you won't be seeing a lot of ads because, frankly, Manhattan is not a battleground state.  But you know people are anxious and they've gone through a really tough time, and sometimes just making an argument that feeds into that dissatisfaction can be enough.

So this will be a close election. The good news is I believe we are right. I believe the American people understand that what made this country great was not a "fend for yourself" economy, but one in which all of us feel a sense of buy-in, and all of us feel a sense of obligation and commitment, a sense of citizenship. And what we also learned in 2008 is that when the American people decide something is right and something is true, regardless of all the money and all the cynicism and all the nonsense that passes for political campaigns these days, and that we always have to guard against getting sucked into because we're just in this muddy field -- despite all that, the American people decide what's right and what's true, they can change the country.

That's the bet we made in 2008; that's the bet I'm making now. And I hope you are ready to work just as hard as you did four years ago, because in many ways this election is even more important. And if you do, then I think I'll have four more years to finish the job.

Thank you. 

Sorry, brother, didn't see you. He's doing a great job. This is an outstanding congressional delegation.

Now, I am here today not just because I need your help -- although I do. But I'm here because the country needs your help. A lot of you got involved in our campaign in 2008, and we came together not because of me; we came together because all of us shared the feeling that we needed to reclaim the basic bargain that built this country, that created the biggest middle class that the world had ever seen.

We came together because of a shared belief that in America, your success should not be determined by the circumstances of your birth. If you're willing to work hard, if you're willing to take responsibility, you should be able to own a home. You should be able to send your kids to college. You shouldn't be bankrupt when you get sick. You should be able to retire with dignity and respect. No matter who you are, no matter where you come from, no matter what you look like, no matter who you love, no matter what your faith, here in America you should be able to make it if you try.



That's why we came together.

And back in 2008, we had a sense that Washington had strayed away from these basic values. Think about it. We had a record surplus that was squandered on tax cuts for people who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them; two wars fought on a credit card; Wall Street speculation reaping huge profits for a few while manufacturing was leaving our shores and a shrinking number of people were doing fantastically well, but more and more people had to get by with falling incomes even while the cost of everything from college to health care was skyrocketing.

We saw the slowest job growth in half a century in the decade before I took office. And then it all culminated in a house of cards that collapsed in the most destructive financial crisis since the Great Depression. In the last six months of 2008 -- while we were campaigning -- our friends and neighbors lost nearly 3 million jobs. Over 800,000 more were lost the month I was sworn in.

So even as we were in Grant Park that night celebrating as much hope and possibility as we felt on that cold day in January on the National Mall, we knew we had our work cut out for us. And so we had to take action -- bold, swift action, and sometimes it wasn't popular -- to prevent another depression. And we understood that the road to recovery would not be easy. We knew it would take time. We knew there would be ups and downs. We knew there would be plenty of stubborn opposition along the way. But we knew -- we also knew this: If we were willing to act wisely and with unity, and if we were persistent and we stayed at it, if we were willing to roll up our sleeves, if we were determined not to quit, then we could come back stronger than before. And I still believe that.

Nothing has shaken my faith in that belief. In fact, the American people continually confirm it for me. Because they are strong and they are resilient, I know America will come back stronger, and I know our better days are ahead of us.



And I believe that because of you. You guys give me faith. It's been tough, but the American people are tougher. And so while some people were saying, let's go ahead and let Detroit go bankrupt, we said let's make our bet on the American worker and on American businesses.



And as Governor O'Malley said, GM is number one again, and we are coming back stronger than before.



We had small businessowners that I had a chance to meet who would describe for me how they...

AUDIENCE MEMBERS: We love you!

 I love you, too. I love you back.





But small businessowners who would decide, you know what, I'm not going to lay off my workers, even though it means I don't have to take a salary this year, or because I know that families are depending on me. We don't quit. We keep going. You saw people who had been laid off from their jobs, and at the age of 50 or 55, they go back and retrain for a new job at a new industry. Don't quit. With grit and resilience and innovation, we're fighting our way back.

And so just like we didn't let Detroit go bankrupt, not only did we save the auto industry but we're actually seeing better cars made, which allows our auto industry to be on top of the world once again...



... doubling fuel-efficiency standards on cars so that you'll get 55 miles a gallon in the next decade. That will save the average family $8,000 during the life of a car. So not only did we prevent liquidation, we're actually coming back stronger than before. The same is true when it came to manufacturing. Manufacturing is now hiring at a faster pace, investing in America again, consistently adding jobs for the first time since the 1990s.



Businesses starting to get back to basics -- the private sector creating nearly 4.3 million new jobs in the last 27 months, over 800,000 jobs just this year alone.

Now, does this make us satisfied? No. Not when we've got so many folks who are still out there looking for work. Not when so many homes are still underwater. Not when so many states are still laying off teachers and first responders.

This crisis did not happen overnight; it will not be solved overnight. The fact is job growth in this recovery has been stronger than the one following the last recession a decade ago. We've recovered more effectively than most other advanced nations. But the hole we have to fill is deep. The global aftershocks are great. And that's why we've got to keep pressing with actions that further strengthen this recovery. We've got more work to do. We know that.

Now, what we also understand is the last thing we can do is return to the very policies that got us into this mess in the first place.  We've got to move forward to the future we imagined where everybody is getting a fair shot, and everybody is doing their fair share, and everybody is playing by the same rules.

And that's the choice in this election. And that's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States of America. We've got more work to do.



Now, my opponent in this election, Governor Romney, is a patriotic American. He's raised a wonderful family. He should be proud of the personal success he achieved as the head of a large financial firm. But I think he's -- he has drawn the wrong lessons from these experiences. He seems to believe that if CEOs and wealthy investors like him are doing well, the rest of us automatically do well.

AUDIENCE MEMBER: No way!

 When a woman shared the story of her financial struggles in Iowa, he gave her an answer out of an economic textbook. He said, "Well, our productivity equals our income." And the implication was, is that people are having trouble paying the bills because they're not productive enough or working hard enough.

Well, those of us who've spent time in the real world know that the problem is not the American people aren't productive enough.



You've been working harder than ever. The challenge we're facing is that for over a decade, harder work hasn't led to higher incomes. Bigger profits at the top haven't led to better jobs across the board. You can't solve that problem if you can't even see it.





What a lot of current Republicans don't seem to get is that a healthy economy doesn't just mean you're maximizing your own profits through massive layoffs or busting unions. You don't make America stronger by shipping jobs and profits overseas. When Governor Romney or the Republicans controlling the House of Representatives propose cutting taxes for folks who don't need them while raising them on 18 million working families, that's not a recipe for economic growth.

And by the way, there's nothing new about these ideas. This is the same old stuff they have been peddling for years.



Although, as Bill Clinton pointed out the other day, this time their agenda is on steroids.



They want even bigger tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans. They want even deeper cuts to things like education and Medicare and research and technology. They want to give banks and insurance companies even more power to do as they please.

AUDIENCE MEMBERS: No!

 And so when I hear Governor Romney say his 25 years in the private sector gives him a special understanding of how the economy works, my question is why are you running with the same bad ideas that brought our economy to the brink of disaster?



Either he believes that it will lead to a different result this time -- although there's no evidence of that -- or he's hoping you won't remember just what happened the last time we tried those bad ideas. And we're here to say we remember, and we're not going back there.



We're moving this country forward.

I want to be clear. We don't expect government to solve all our problems, and it shouldn't try to solve all our problems. I learned from my mother that no education policy is more important than your parents nagging you... 

My first job -- or one of my first jobs out of college was working with a group of Catholic churches who taught me no poverty program can make as much of a difference in people's lives as the kindness and commitment and engagement of a caring neighbors and caring friends. And not every regulation is smart. Not every tax dollar is spent wisely. And not every person can be helped who refuses to help themselves.

But that's not an excuse to tell the vast majority of responsible, hardworking Americans -- many of whom are struggling -- you're on your own; that unless you are lucky to have parents who can afford to lend you money, you may not be able to go to college; that even if you pay your premiums every month, the insurance company may decide to drop your coverage when you need it most and you're out of luck. That's not who we are. That's not what built America.

We built this country together. We built railroads and highways and the Hoover Dam and the Golden Gate Bridge. We built those things together. We sent my grandfather's generation to college on the GI Bill, including my grandfather. We did that together. We didn't do these things -- making investments in research that ultimately led to the Internet or GPS, or all these things that created platforms for private businesses to succeed -- we didn't do these things for one particular individual or one particularly group. We did it because we understood this will make us all richer. If we've got great public schools and great public universities, and we're making these investments in outstanding infrastructure, that's good for everybody. Everybody can succeed. It moved us together as one nation, and as one people.

And that's the lesson -- the true lesson of our past. That's the right vision for our future. That's why I'm running again for President of the United States.



You know, I'm running to make sure that by the end of this decade, more of our citizens hold college degrees than any nation on Earth. I want to help our schools hire and reward the best teachers, especially in math and science.

 I want to give 2 million more Americans the chance to go to community colleges and learn the skills that local businesses are looking for right now.



In the 21st century, higher education cannot be a luxury; it is an economic imperative that every American should be able to afford. And we're going to make that happen. That's the choice in this election. That's why I'm running for President.



I want to make sure the next generation of high-tech manufacturing takes root in Baltimore and Cleveland and Pittsburgh.



I want to stop rewarding businesses that ship jobs overseas. I want to start rewarding companies that are creating jobs and investing right here in Maryland, right here in the United States of America. That's the choice in this election.



I'm running because I want us to keep moving towards a future where we control our own energy. Our dependence on foreign oil is at its lowest point in 16 years.



As I said, we doubled fuel-efficiency standards on cars, with cooperation from workers and management, which is why our cars will average nearly 55 miles per gallon. Thousands of Americans have jobs because the production of renewable energy in this country has doubled in just three years.

Now is not the time to cut these investments out, especially when we're giving $4 billion away to oil companies every year. Now is the time to end those subsidies to an industry that's already profitable...



... double down on clean energy that has never been more promising for our economy and our security and for the safety of our planet.



That's why I'm running for President. That's the choice in this election.



For the first time in nine years, there are no Americans fighting in Iraq.



Bin Laden is no longer a threat to this country. Al Qaeda is on the path to defeat. By 2014, the war in Afghanistan will be over.



So there is a foreign policy dimension to this election.

America is safer and more respected because of the courage and the selflessness of the United States Armed Forces. And as long as I'm Commander-in-Chief, with the help of this outstanding congressional delegation, this country will care for our veterans and serve our veterans as well as they've served us.



Nobody who fights for this country should have to fight for a job or a roof over their heads when they come home. There's just a difference between me and the other guy on this issue.

My opponent says it was "tragic" to end the war in Iraq. He won't set a timeline to end the war in Afghanistan. I have set that timeline. I intend to keep it, because after a decade of war that's cost us thousands of lives and over a trillion dollars, the nation we need to build is our own.



So I want to use half of what we're no longer spending on war to pay down our deficit. I want to invest the rest in education and research. I want us to repair our bridges and our roads, our runways, our wireless networks. And that's the choice in this election.

I want to pay down our debt in a way that is balanced and responsible. I love listening to these guys give us lectures about debt and deficits.



I inherited a trillion-dollar deficit.



We had a surplus; they turned it into a deficit -- built in a structural deficit that extends for decades.

QUESTION: And then they blamed you! 

 Isn't that something?



So we inherited a trillion-dollar deficit. We signed $2 trillion of spending cuts into law. I laid out a detailed plan for a total of $4 trillion in deficit reduction. My opponent won't admit it, but even when you account for the steps we took to prevent a depression and jumpstart the economy -- so you include the Recovery Act, all the stuff we did to help states like Maryland make sure that they didn't have to lay folks off, and put people back to work -- even if you take that into account, spending under my administration has grown more slowly than under any President in 60 years.



So this notion that somehow we caused the deficits is just wrong.



It's just not true. And anybody who looks at the math will tell you it's not true. And if they start trying to give you a bunch of facts and figures suggesting that it's true, what they're not telling you is, is that they baked all this stuff into the cake with those tax cuts and a prescription drug plan that they didn't pay for, and the war. So all this stuff is baked in -- with all the interest payments for it.

It's like somebody goes to a restaurant, orders a big steak dinner, martini all that stuff, and then just as you're sitting down -- they leave ...



... and accuse you of running up the tab.



That's what they do. I am not making this up.



I mean, press, go back, check, take a look at the numbers.

So we've made tough cuts and we've proposed additional work that we can do -- streamlining government, cutting more waste, reforming our tax code so it's simpler and fair, but also so that it asks the wealthiest Americans -- folks like me -- to pay a little bit more.

Now, in contrast, my opponent, he's proposed a new $5 trillion tax cut on top of the Bush tax cuts. This includes a 25 percent tax cut for nearly every millionaire in the country. Now, he won't detail how he's going to pay for this, but the bill for this tax cut will either be passed on to our children, or it's going to be paid for by you -- a whole lot of ordinary Americans. And I refuse to let that happen again.



I refuse to pay for another millionaire's tax cut by eliminating medical research on projects that could help cure cancer or Alzheimer's. I refuse to pay for another tax cut by kicking kids off of Head Start programs... 

... or asking students to pay more for college, or eliminating health insurance for millions of poor and elderly and disabled Americans who rely on Medicaid.

I'm not going to allow Medicare to be turned into a voucher that would end the program as we know it. We're going to reform Medicare not by shifting costs to seniors, but by reducing the spending that isn't making people healthier. There are ways to do this that don't but the burden on seniors. That's what's at stake, Baltimore.

And on issue after issue, we cannot afford the next four years going backward. We need forward, not backwards.



We need better, not worse.



America doesn't need to refight the battles we just had over Wall Street reform and health care reform.

Let me tell you something. Allowing 2.5 million young people to stay on their parent's health insurance plan, that was the right thing to do.



Cutting prescription drug costs for seniors -- right thing to do. We're not going to go back to the days when insurance companies could cancel your policy, or deny you coverage, or charge women differently than men. We're not going back there.

We don't need another political fight about ending a woman's right to choose, or getting rid of Planned Parenthood...



... taking away access to affordable birth control. I want women to control their own health choices, just like I want my daughters to have the same opportunities as your sons.



Working with Barbara Mikulski and others, we want to -- I want to sign the Paycheck Fairness Act into law so women can fight for fair pay. We're not turning back the clock. We want to go forward.



We need to put an end to elections where multimillion-dollar donations speak louder than the voices of ordinary citizens.

 We're not going back to the days when you could be kicked out of the United States military just because of who you are and who you love.



We're moving forward to a country where we treat everybody fairly and everybody equally, with dignity and respect. And here in Maryland, thanks to the leadership of committed citizens and Governor O'Malley, you have a chance to reaffirm that principle in the voting booth in November. It's the right thing to do.



It's time to stop denying citizenship to responsible young people just because they're children of undocumented immigrants.



You know, this country is at its best when we harness the God- given talents of every individual, when we hear every voice, when we come together as one American family and we're all striving for the same American Sream. That's what we're fighting for. That's why I'm running for President. And that's why I need your help.



Maryland, this election is going to be even closer than the last one. We're going to have to contend with even more negative ads, more cynicism, more foolishness than we saw in the last campaign. But the outcome of this election, ultimately, it's up to you. That's one thing we learned in 2008. There's nothing more powerful than millions of voices calling for change. When you knock on enough doors, and pick up a phone and talk to enough neighbors and friends, when you decide it's time for change to happen, guess what -- change happens. Change comes to America.



And that's the spirit we need again. So if people ask you, what's this campaign about, you tell them it's still about hope. You tell them it's still about change. You tell them it's still about ordinary people who believe that in the face of great odds, we can make a difference in the life of this country.

I still believe that. I believe this country is not as divided as our politics suggest. We've got more in common than the pundits tell us. I believe we're not Democrats or Republicans first -- we're Americans first. 

AUDIENCE: Yes, we do! Yes, we do! Four more years! Four more years!

 I told you in 2008 I wasn't a perfect man. Michelle told you, too. 

And I told you I'd never be a perfect President. But I promised you I would always tell you what I thought, and I'd always tell you where I stood. And most of all, I told you I'd wake up every single day fighting as hard as I knew how on your behalf to make your life a little bit better. And I have kept that promise. And I will keep it as long as I have the honor of serving as your President.

So if you're willing to stick with me and fight with me, and press on, if you're willing to work even harder than we did in 2008, I guarantee you we will move this country forward. We will finish what we started. And we'll remind the world just why it is the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth.

God bless you. God bless America. Thank you.

 Hello!  Staff was saying, Mr. President, you have some other stuff that you have to do.

There are a couple of acknowledgments that I want to make. First of all, you've got one of the best mayors in the country, Mayor Michael Nutter is here. 

So I'm here not just because I need your help -- although I do. 

It's that idea that builds the broadest middle class in the history of the world --  -- and that was and has been the strength of America, the backbone of America -- is that everybody had a shot. And we felt back in 2008 that those ideals were being lost, that we had taken a wrong turn. We had taken a surplus, left behind by President Clinton, and turned it into deficits as far as the eye could see -- not because we invested in our economic future, but because we gave tax cuts to folks who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them. We put two wars on a credit card. Our economy increasingly was built on financial speculation and a housing bubble. Manufacturing was leaving our shores.

And although a few people were doing really, really well, that broad-based middle class that built this country, that was the essence of this country, found themselves -- you found yourselves -- in a situation where wages, incomes were flat-lining, and job growth was the most sluggish it had been in 50, 60 years, and the cost of everything from health care to college education kept on going up and up and up. And it all culminated in the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression -- three million jobs lost in the six months before I took office, while we were campaigning; 800,000 jobs lost the month that I was sworn into office. And so we had to make a series of tough decisions and decisive decisions and quick decisions, and we had to do it without much help from the other side. But the thing that gave me confidence throughout was what I had learned about the American people as I traveled all across the country -- and it is a great privilege just running for President, and obviously a greater privilege being President, because you meet Americans from every walk of life, and they show you their grit and they show you their determination. And it turns out Americans are tougher than any tough times. 

And so when some people said we should let Detroit go bankrupt, we decided, no, we're going to make a bet on the American worker and American industry. And because of the actions that we took, GM is back on top and we're seeing the auto industry rehiring and producing better cars than ever. 

So we've made progress. And the reason we made progress was in part because of our policies, but in part because Americans everywhere figured out how they were going to respond. And so you had small business owners who decided, I'm not going to lay off these workers because their families are counting on their jobs; that maybe I'll take out less this year, maybe I won't even pay myself a salary this year so I can keep my doors open.

And you had folks who were laid off at the age of 45 or 50 and they decided, you know what, I'm not just going to give up, I'm going to retrain and I'm going to find a job for the future, even if it means I'm sitting in a classroom with kids who are my kid's age. All across the country people made tough decisions, but they were determined to move forward because, Americans, we don't quit. We don't quit. 

And so we can say that we are in a stronger position, we are moving in a better direction, than when I took office. 

And let me tell you something: That is all the other side is offering. That's all they're offering. Governor Romney is a patriotic American, he's got a lovely family and he should be proud of his personal success. But his ideas are just retreads of stuff that we have tried and that have failed. Bill Clinton described it well the other day -- he said, they want to do the same thing, just on steroids.  -- then it boils down to deeper tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans, $5 trillion in tax cuts on top of the Bush tax cuts, an average of a 25 percent tax cut for millionaires all across the country, and the elimination of regulations that would make sure that Wall Street doesn't engage in the kind of behavior that resulted in this crisis; that would roll back the kinds of progress we've made making sure insurance companies can't drop you when you get sick; that would roll back environmental and worker protection and consumer protections that we have been working on not just during my administration, but for the last 30, 40 years. And that's it. That's the essence of what they're offering.

And I guess he thinks either it would result in a different outcome than it did when we just tried this 10 years ago, or he and the Republican Congress are counting on the notion that we forgot how it turned out. 

I'm running to make sure that we keep bringing manufacturing and industry back to Philadelphia, back to Pittsburgh, back to Pennsylvania, back to Ohio. 

I'm running to make sure that we continue on a path of providing the best education possible for every single one of our children, and make sure that we've got the highest rates of college graduates of any country on Earth, because that's going to be the future. 

I'm running because I want to continue to see America be the best innovator in the world. When you think about Benjamin Franklin -- I just had a chance to talk to these outstanding students from a science and leadership academy who graduated. 

That's how we became an economic superpower. So the notion that we would now shortchange our investments in science and basic research, the possible cures for cancer or Alzheimer's, or the clean energy that can make sure that we're doing something about climate change and saving money for families -- that's not the answer rolling back those investments. We've got to move forward. We're not going to move backwards. That's why I'm running for President of the United States again. 

I'm running because I want us to continue to build this country. We are a nation of builders. The Mayor and I were talking as we were driving from the airport about all the projects, all the infrastructure, all the folks being put back to work making Philadelphia a more attractive place for people to do business. 

And all across the country, I want us to rebuild our roads and our bridges, our airports. I want us to build broadband lines and high-speed rail and wireless networks so that we have the platform for businesses to succeed all across this country. 

I'm running because I believe in America's energy future. Since I've been President -- oil production, up; natural gas production, up. Oil imports, down -- under 50 percent. 

And I'm running for President because I want to do something about our debt and our deficits in a balanced and responsible way.  And that is as sharp a contrast as we've got between my approach and what Republicans are peddling right now. And I think this is worth focusing on. They think somehow they've got a winner on this issue. Let's talk about the facts here.

Remember, when the last Democratic President was in office, we had a surplus.  By the time I got into office, we had a $1 trillion deficit because of tax cuts that weren't paid for, two wars that weren't paid for, a prescription drug plan that was not paid for. We had baked into the cake structural deficits that were made even worse by the financial crisis.

And so for these folks suddenly to get religion -- 

The two Presidents with the least growth in government spending in the modern era happen to be two Democrats named Barack Obama and Bill Clinton.  It wasn't the other guys. And now you've got Mr. Romney proposing a $5 trillion tax cut. And he doesn't detail how it would be paid for, but if you go through the possibilities, then one of two things: Either it's not paid for, in which case, that's $5 trillion that's piled on top of the debt we already have, passed onto the next generation. Or it's going to come from middle- class families all across this country. Those are the only two possibilities.

And I'm running for President because we're not going to let that happen. 

We've got to do something about the debt and deficits, and the way to do it is by making sure that, yes, we go after waste in government. Not every government program works. Not every proposal or program or policy the government offers is ideal. But what we do have to make sure of is that we do it in a balanced way. So even as we're paring back on things that don't work -- and I've already signed $2 trillion of cuts into law already and have proposed $2 trillion in additional deficit reduction -- even as we're making sensible cuts, even as we're reforming our health care system to make sure that the dollars we pay actually make us healthier, what we're not going to do is to make the most vulnerable people in our society, as well as the middle class, shoulder the burden. We're going to ask those like myself who are best equipped to help to do their fair share because that's part of the American bargain. Everybody gets a fair shot. Everybody does their fair share. Everybody plays by the same set of rules. 

That's what we mean when we say we're going forward. We're not going to re-litigate Wall Street reform. That was the right thing to do. We're not going to re-litigate health care reform. It was the right thing to do; 2.5 million young people who can stay on their parents' plan and now have health insurance who didn't otherwise have -- that was the right thing to do. 

In 2008, I said I'd end the war in Iraq. I ended it. 

We're not going to go back to the days when you couldn't serve in the military just because of who you love. 

We want to move forward and make sure that elections aren't just about $10 million checks being written by folks who have vested interests in maintaining the status quo.  Look, we are at our best when every voice is heard, when everybody has a stake. And that's not just a Democratic tradition. That is an American tradition. That's a tradition started by folks like Benjamin Franklin. That's the essence of our creed.

If you look at our history, when we've made progress we've done it together. That's how this country got built. That's how my grandfather's generation was educated on a GI Bill. That's how we built the Hoover Dam. That's how we sent a man to the moon. We believe in individual initiative and the free market. We believe in entrepreneurs and risk takers being rewarded. We love folks getting rich --  -- that's part of America's success.

But we also understand there are some things we do together as a nation.  That's the true lesson of our history. And that's the choice that we face in this election.

Now, let me tell you, this election is going to be close -- because folks have gone through a tough time. And no matter how many times you tell them, well, we avoided a whole bunch of really bad stuff -- if you don't have a job, if your house is still underwater, if you haven't seen your income go up in a decade, you're still frustrated. You're still concerned about your kid's future. And rightly so.

And the other side, they don't have any new ideas. I am telling you, I want you all to pay attention over the next five months and see if they're offering a single thing that they did not try when they were in charge, because you won't see it. It will be the same stuff. The same okey-doke.  But you know what they do have is they'll have $500 million worth of negative ads. And they will tap into and feed into cynicism and a sense of frustration. And they'll try to direct blame. That's a campaign they know how to run.

The thing is, though, what you guys taught me in 2008 was when Americans, when citizens decide to come together, when they say, it's time for change; when they start talking to their neighbors and their friends and they're really starting to pay attention in terms of who's saying what, and asking themselves, how do we move this country forward -- when you decide change needs to happen, guess what? It happens. 

And so, I have never been more convinced about the strength and the dignity of the American people. I've never been more convinced about our prospects for the future, and the reason is because of you.

As I travel all across this country, the American people constantly give me hope. They constantly give me cause for optimism. I still believe in you. And I told you back in 2008 that I wouldn't be -- I wasn't a perfect man. Michelle would tell you that. 

And so I hope you still believe in me. 

Thank you, everybody. God bless you. God bless America. 

 Thank you, everybody.  -- I'm just saying, when you've got wonderful daughters it puts a smile on your face. But thank you so much for your hospitality.

You guys benefit from having one of the best governors in the country. Please give Martin O'Malley a big round of applause. 

And of course, all of you are here, and we're very pleased with that. I'm going to be very brief, because usually what I want to do in a setting like this is to take questions and provide comments or get advice.

But let me just say briefly, building on what Martin said, we've gone through the toughest economy and the toughest financial crisis in our lifetimes. What we've seen not just here in the United States but worldwide is something that we haven't seen since the '30s. And we've still got a long way to go. There are a lot of folks out there who are hurting; a lot of folks who are looking for work or are underemployed; a lot of folks whose homes are underwater -- and we've been reading over the last several days about because of the plunge in housing prices, the loss of that wealth that a lot of families are experiencing -- it's put enormous strains on people all across the country, including here in Maryland.

But what we have been able to do over the last three and a half years, after a decade in which we had been moving in the wrong direction, is to begin to point towards a trajectory where here in this country everybody is getting a fair shot, everybody is doing their fair share, everybody is playing by the same set of rules -- trying to restore those core values here in America where if you work hard, you can make it; regardless of where you come from, what you look like, you have a chance if you act responsibly and you're willing to put in some sweat equity to make it here in America.

That's what the rescue of the auto industry was all about -- recognizing that if you place a bet on American workers and American ingenuity, and people start cooperating, that we could once again be number one. And we're seeing GM now the number-one automaker in the work and the U.S. auto industry not only back on its feet, but producing cars that people want to buy all around the world.

It's what we're seeing in clean energy, where we've now doubled clean energy production since I came into office. The progress that we've been able to make with respect to making sure that businesses have markets all around the world so that we're not just known as a country that buys things, but we're also a country that's selling stuff. And we're well on track to double our exports since I came into office -- because I want once again for products made in the United States to be known around the world as the best products that are available.

So we've been able to right the ship a little bit. We're moving in the right direction, but this election in many ways is going to be more consequential than 2008, because for all the changes that we've been able to achieve -- equal pay for equal work legislation, reversing "don't ask, don't tell," health care legislation that gives 2.5 million young people the ability to stay on their parent's health care plans and gives 30 million people the opportunity to get affordable insurance for the first time, Wall Street reforms that are able to make sure that we don't go through another taxpayer bailout of our banking system like we did that last time -- despite all that work, we're going to need another term to make sure that we consolidate these gains and we lock in the kind of progress that we need to ensure that America's middle class is growing again.

And the reason this election is so important is because you'll never see a sharper contrast between the two parties in the vision that they have for where this country needs to go.

You've got a party that at this point its only recipe for success is another $5 trillion worth of tax cuts on top of the Bush tax cuts that -- by every independent analyst who's looked at it -- would actually make a our debt and our deficits much worse, or alternatively, would lead to us slashing the kinds of investments that are required for us to grow over the long term -- investments in basic science, and research and development, that have been made us an economic superpower; investments in education because we know that in the 21st century those countries that have the best-trained workers are going to be the most successful; investments we make in our basic infrastructure -- our roads, our bridges, broadband lines, wireless networks; investments we make in ensuring that people who've worked all their lives can retire with dignity and respect, things like Medicare and Social Security.

And so there's going to be a very stark choice in terms of how we deal with our debt and our deficits, how we grow an economy, how we invest in our people to make sure that the next generations succeeds.

And the good news is, is that the American people generally agree with our vision. I mean, if you just put in front of them issue after issue and you present the Democratic approach and the Republican approach, we win. The challenge is because folks are still hurting right now, the other side feels that it's enough for them to just sit back and say things aren't as good as they should be, and it's Obama's fault. I mean, you can pretty much put their campaign on a tweet and have some characters to spare. 

And that's why your involvement, your contributions, your investment in this election, your willingness to talk to your friends and your neighbors and your coworkers, and to help mobilize the same kind of energy on the ground that we had last time is going to be so important. And it's going to be important not just for this presidential election but it's going to be important to make sure that we retain control of the Senate. It's going to be important for us to be able to take the House. 

But the one last thought I want to leave you with is a sense of optimism about how solvable our problems are. It's become fashionable to talk about how America can't recover from these kinds of challenges. You know what, that's what they've said throughout our history. They've always underestimated the resilience and the strength of the American people. And we've been through tougher times before.

And I, as you might imagine, spend a lot of time traveling all around the world -- there's not a country that wouldn't trade places with us.  If you look at as tough as things have been, the pace at which we've grown, the accessibility of solutions to our fiscal problems relative to what's happening in Europe, for example -- what's required is not out of reach.

It will require some tough choices. Most of all, it requires those on Capitol Hill to work across party lines to achieve some basic solutions. But we are poised to make sure that the 21st century is the American Century, just like the 20th century was. It's going to require some work, though, and this election is going to help determine it.

So I hope you guys are ready to go. I hope you are still fired up. I am just as determined as I've ever been, and I'm looking forward to this campaign. 

So thank you. Thank you. Thank you so much.

Now, I'm here not just because I need your help, but I'm here because the country needs your help. When we came together -- and so many of you were supporters back in 2008, and a lot of you got on this bandwagon before people could even pronounce my name properly -- we came together not just to support me, not just to support an individual. The idea was that we were making a commitment to each other, that there were a set of values and ideals, there were a set of principles that we believed in as Americans that date back to the founding of this country.

This did not begin as a perfect union, but the charter of this country -- our Declaration of Independence, our Constitution -- spoke to the possibility of perfecting the union. There were those who were excluded, there were those who were not considered full citizens, but there was this idea at the core of America that can be expressed very simply, which is in this country you should be able to make it if you try; if you're willing to work hard, if you're willing to take responsibility, that everybody can make it, regardless of what they look like, or where they come from, what faith they hold, or who they love -- that everybody should be able to make it in this country if they try.

Now, there were a lot of struggles to fulfill that promise. There was a war fought, and the civil rights movement and the women's rights movement and a workers' movement. But the trajectory of this country has always been we're going to expand more and more opportunity to more and more people, and promote dignity and respect and justice and equality and fairness for more and more people. That's been the trajectory of this country. That's the reason I can stand here today as President of the United States, because of the extraordinary work that was done in the past.

And what we recognized in 2008 was, as much progress as had been made, it seemed like we were taking a wrong turn, that we were not being true to those ideals that everybody can make it. So we had a surplus turned into a deficit because of tax cuts for folks who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them. We had two wars fought on a credit card. A few people were doing really well, but more and more folks were struggling to get by as costs of everything from health care to sending your kid to college were skyrocketing, and people's incomes and wages were flat-lining, and job growth was stagnant, and manufacturing was moving offshore.

And so we came together to affirm and assert that we were going to restore that basic sense that in America, everybody gets a fair shot and everybody does their fair share and everybody plays by the same set of rules.

Now, we didn't know at the time that I started running that we would end up experiencing the worst financial crisis in our lifetimes. We didn't know that we were losing 4 million jobs even as I was still campaigning, lose 800,000 the month that I took office. But we understood that we were going to have to try to work as hard as we could to bring about change that was desperately needed to fulfill this country's promise.

And so, yes, we've gone through three and a half years of very difficult times. I had to make a bunch of decisions that weren't always popular. But we made the right decisions. Because it turns out that the American people are tougher than tough times. So when some folks said we should let Detroit go bankrupt we said we're not going to let that happen; we're going to save more than a million jobs. And right now, GM is the number-one automaker in the world once again and Detroit is coming back better than ever.



All across the country we put people back to work rebuilding our roads and our bridges and our infrastructure, and made sure that teachers and firefighters and police officers could stay on the job. We stabilized the financial system. We made sure that loans were starting to flow again to small businesses, and businesses started getting back to basics. And as a consequence, we've now created over 4 million jobs over the last couple of years -- more than 800,000 this year alone -- more jobs in the manufacturing sector than any time since the 1990s.

Because of the resilience and the grit of the American people all across this country, we're starting to see progress again. We're starting to move in the right direction again.

But -- and here's the reason I'm here today -- we're not finished. We've got more work to do.



This journey is not over.

There are still too many folks out there who are hurting, who are desperate for a job but can't find one. Folks who have seen their homes lose value -- $100,000 underwater, don't know what it will mean for themselves, for their future. Too many young people who still are trying to go to college and having a tough time affording it. So despite all the work that we've done, we've still got more work to do.

And we've got an election that in some ways is going to be more critical than 2008, because the other party has gone in a direction that is contrary to those values that we fought for in 2008. You know, Governor Romney is a patriotic American and he's got a beautiful family, and he's been very successful. But along with this Republican Congress, they've got a vision that doesn't say, we work together; it says, everybody is on their own. It says if you don't have health care, tough luck, you're on your own, figure it out. It says if you were a child born into poverty, pull pull yourself up by your own bootstraps -- even if you don't have boots.



You're on your own.

It's a vision that basically believes that the answer to every question are more tax cuts for the wealthiest, the most powerful; the fewest regulations that protect consumers, or keep our air and water clean, or make sure that workers are treated fairly; and that somehow, if government isn't doing anything then the country is automatically going to be better.

Now, it would be one thing if we hadn't tried this.



But we tried it. Remember there was a previous administration. We tried this whole recipe and it didn't work. And the idea that we -- after all the progress we fought for, everything that we've done over the last three and a half years -- that we'd go back to the very same policies that got us into this mess in the first place -- I don't think so.



We are not going to let it happen. And that's the reason why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States of America.



We're not going backwards. We're going forwards. We are going forward. We're moving forward.



And everything that we've accomplished -- everything that we've accomplished with outstanding members of Congress like Karen Bass, who's here today, by the way -- give Karen a big round of applause. We love Karen.



Everything that we've accomplished should give us confidence not only that we can win this election but that we can keep progress going.

I keep a checklist in my desk of stuff I said I was going to do -- a little to-do list. This is separate from Michelle's to-do list.



She's got her own to-do list. I check both of them every day. Said that we would make sure that 30 million Americans get health care -- check, we got that done...



... 2.5 million young people who are on their parent's health insurance plans right now -- I had a gentleman, while we were taking photos, come up and say, boy, that's really helping me because my daughter, she needed health care. And think about if somebody who can afford to come here today got helped, imagine what that means for a whole bunch of families all across the country. Imagine what that means.



Doubled fuel-efficiency standards on cars so that by the next -- by the middle of the next decade, you're going to see cars getting 55 miles per gallon.



That's not only good for your pocketbook; it's helping reduce our dependence on foreign oil and it's saving the environment in the process.



We took tens of billions of dollars that were going to banks, subsidizing them through the student loan program, we said, let's take that money, let's give it directly to students. And as a consequence, we've gotten millions of people who are now getting opportunities for Pell grants and reducing their loan burden -- as a consequence of the work that we did.



We said, in a country that is constantly expanding opportunity, it does not make sense for patriotic Americans doing outstanding work not to be able to serve the country they love just because of who they love. And so we ended "don't ask, don't tell."



An expression of our values and our ideals.

War in Iraq -- over.



Afghanistan -- in transition.



Al Qaeda -- on the ropes. Bin Laden -- gone.



All that progress that we've made, it shouldn't make us complacent, but it should give us confidence that if we're willing to work hard, we can bring about more changes, more things that help ordinary families, so that if you're working hard out there, you can find a job, you can pay a mortgage, send your kids to college, retire with some dignity and some respect. That's what folks are looking for.

The American people, they're not -- they don't have wild expectations. They understand that government can't solve every problem, and it shouldn't try. They recognize that they've got to take responsibility for making sure their children are instilled with a love of knowledge and taking school seriously. They understand that not everybody can be helped if they don't want to be helped. They're not looking for a handout, but they are looking for a hand up. They are looking for a shot, an opportunity. And so we've got more work to do on a whole range of fronts.

We've got more work to do to make sure that manufacturing and good jobs continue to come back onshore. Instead of giving tax breaks to companies that ship jobs overseas, we want to give companies tax breaks that are investing here in the United States of America and creating jobs for our folks back home.

 We've got more work to do. For all the work we've done improving our schools -- and we have made historic transformations -- 40 states have initiated, because of our Race to the Top program, major reforms that focus on learning K through 12, improving teacher performance. We've still got more work to do. There are still schools right here in Los Angeles and all across the country where half the kids are dropping out before they graduate. One out of 10 are reading at grade level. So we've got to make investments, not just investments in money -- although it does involve money -- but also investments in reform, to make sure that there is not a child in America who is not equipped when they graduate to compete in this global economy.

And it also means making sure that they can afford to go to college -- and if they're not going to a four-year college or university, they can go to a two-year college or university -- but get the skills that they need. And there are programs out there that work. We know they work. The question is if we can scale them up to make sure that everybody has access to them.

We've got to implement health care reform. We've got to implement Wall Street reform to make sure we don't see another taxpayer-funded bailout. I don't want to have to go through that again.



And we've got to balance our fiscal situation in a responsible way. And this is going to be a major debate that comes up next year. The other side, they're always talking about debt and deficits, which I find interesting since they're always the ones who run up the debt and the deficits, say we don't care about deficits -- until Democrats get into office and suddenly they see religion.



But now you've got a presidential candidate on the other side and a Republican Congress that says not only do we want to renew the Bush tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans, we want to double down with $5 trillion more worth of tax cuts. And when they do try to explain how it would be paid for, when you do the math, what it comes down to is they would eliminate investments in science and technology that have made us an economic superpower; investments in our infrastructure that allow us to move goods and services and people around the world and make us competitive. They want to eliminate investments in education at the precise time when we've got to be investing in our young people's education.

If you implemented their budget, you could not afford anything outside of defense, Social Security, interest on the national debt and Medicare. Everything else would be fundamentally wiped out. Now, we think deficits and debt are important. But we think that the way to do it is, yes, eliminate programs that don't work, reform our health system not by shifting cost to seniors, but by reducing costs and improving quality of care, but also, let's ask those of us who can do a little bit more to do a little bit more. For us to go back to the tax rates under Bill Clinton for folks who are millionaires or billionaires, that's not asking too much. That's consistent with the idea that everybody does their fair share.



That is something that has made this country great and is something that we still believe.

So there are a lot of reasons why this election is important. There are probably going to be some additional Supreme Court appointments. We've got the other side saying that they'd defund Planned Parenthood. I believe that women's health should be in the control of women.



I think a program like Medicaid, we can't just slash it in ways that make children and the disabled and our seniors more vulnerable. I'm not going to allow them to roll back progress that we've made on health care. We're going to have to make sure that we keep the gains that we've made on things like student loans.

So there are all kinds of reasons why this election is important. But I want to tell you, this election is also going to be close, though. And the reason it's going to be close is not because the other side has good ideas. They don't.



It's not because they've got new ideas, because as Bill Clinton said the other day, this is the just the same old thing they've been peddling for the last 20 years -- it's just on steroids.



The reason it's going to be close is because there are still folks out there who are hurting. There are still folks out there who are having a tough time. And that means that as frustrated as they are, if they're receiving $500 million worth of negative ads from these super PACs, then people start wondering, well, maybe nothing can work in Washington. Maybe that "change we can believe in," maybe it couldn't happen.

The other side is not going to provide new ideas, but they will try to tap into people's frustrations about a very difficult period in our history. And so we're going to have to work through the cynicism and the negativity and the just plain nonsense that we've become accustomed to during political campaigns. It will just be funded at a higher level than we've ever seen before.

Here is the thing that makes me confident, though -- what you taught me in 2008 was that when folks get together, when citizens get together, when ordinary people get together, and decide it's time for change to happen, you know what, change happens. Change happens when you make a commitment and you're talking to your friends and your neighbors, and suddenly young people are getting engaged and involved again in the life of this country -- and people are knocking on doors and making phone calls, and talking about the issues and getting informed. When that happens, it can't be stopped. It doesn't matter how much money the other side spends. It doesn't matter how much misinformation is out there -- the truth shall out.

And I expect that's going to happen this time. I understand some people -- when they take pictures with me, they show me -- pictures that we took four years ago together, they want me to sign them. And it's generally just a reminder of how old I'm getting.



I'm all gray and dinged up...



... bruised and battered. But I want everybody here to know that I am more determined now than I have ever been.



I have more confidence in the American people than ever before.



Because when I travel around the country -- when I travel around the country and I meet a single mom who has raised some wonderful child who has now gone to college and she never got more than a high school education, and she is seeing him graduate, and she tells us, that's what all that work was for; or I meet a small business owner who didn't lay off his workers even during really tough times and didn't take a salary himself because he understood a lot of families were being supported at that time; when I meet our troops who just serve us with such professionalism and dignity and patriotism, and never complain -- all across the country you travel and you're just reminded how decent the American people are, how good they are, how right their instincts are.

I still believe in the American people. And so I hope you still believe in me.



I told you when I was running in 2008, I'm not a perfect man and I am not a perfect President. But I told you, I'd always tell you what I thought, I'd always tell you where I stood, and I'd always every day wake up working as hard as I knew how to make your lives a little bit better. And you know what, I have kept that promise.



I have kept that promise.

And so if you're willing to stick with me on this, and knock on some more doors and make some more phone calls, and work even harder this time than you did the last time, then we won't just win an election, but we will finish what we started.



Everybody will have a shot in this country. And we'll remind the world just why it is that the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth.

Thank you, everybody. God bless you. God bless America.

 I'm just saying.  But usually in these kinds of settings where I've got a few friends, I like to spend most of my time in a conversation, as opposed to giving a long speech. So I'm just going to make a few brief remarks at the top.

I just came from a wonderful event over at the Wilshire or the Hilton -- I'm not sure which.  The reason some of you got involved is because I think you understood that there are a set of values that make this country extraordinary, that make this country exceptional.

It's not just our military might or the size of our economy. It has to do with a set of ideas, a creed, that started more than 200 years ago, when a band of colonists decided that they had a different idea about self-governance and they had an idea that said everybody is created equal, and everybody can participate, and each of us, if we're willing to work hard and take responsibility, can take our lives as far as our dreams will take us.

And those documents that they issued were not perfect and the society in which they lived wasn't perfect. But they created this space where, through successive generations, we could continually broaden the scope of opportunity to more and more people, and include more and more people as citizens, and recognize each other as part of this American story.

And so through civil wars and civil rights and women's rights and workers' rights, there's been this constant battle so that more and more people can take part. And that's made us all stronger. That's made us all richer. And it's made us this beacon for the rest of the world.

And the sense was back in 2008 that maybe we had lost our way, because history doesn't always move in a straight line, and so there are times where we go sideways and even times where we step back. And we looked and we said we've seen a surplus squandered on tax cuts for folks who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them. We've seen two wars paid on a credit card. We've seen an economy that has done very well for a few but has made it tougher and tougher for ordinary folks to get by. This was all before the financial crisis, before we knew what was going to happen when Lehmans collapsed. And so we had a sense, we can do better than this. But the America we believe in is one where everybody has a shot, everybody has a fair shot and everybody does their fair share and everybody is playing by the same set of rules, and if you're willing to put your all into it, you can find a job or start a business, and buy a home, and send your kids to college and they're going to do even better than you can. And nobody is excluded from it. It doesn't matter what you look like, where you come from, what your last name is, who you love.

That's what we were fighting for in 2008. And now we've gone through a very difficult period in our history -- the toughest economy -- I'm looking around the room -- that any of us have lived through. And the good news is it turns out the American people are tougher than tough times, and so we have bounced back. And we made some very tough decisions to save the auto industry and to stabilize the financial system and keep teachers in the classroom. And America is coming back.

We've seen more than 4 million jobs created -- 800,000 this year alone -- and manufacturing stronger than it's been since the 1990s, and a whole lot of progress has been made. But we've still got a lot more work to do. And that's why, hopefully, you're here tonight, because you recognize that that journey we started in 2008 is not finished.

We've made sure that 30 million people can get health insurance who didn't have it before -- 

We have signed the Lilly Ledbetter Act that says equal pay for equal work, because I want my daughters treated the same way your sons are.

We have doubled fuel-efficiency standards on cars, and doubled the amount of clean energy to make sure that we're not only creating jobs and reducing dependence on foreign oil, but making sure that we're also saving the planet in the process and doing something about climate change.

We've changed the education system in remarkable ways all across the country, made it easier for young people to go to college. Millions of young people are getting scholarships now or loans or grants that they weren't getting before.

So we made a lot of progress, but we've still got a lot of work to do. We still have an immigration system that is broken. We still have an economy where too many people are out of work and homes are underwater. And there is a fundamental contrast between our vision of where America needs to go and where the other side needs to go -- the other side wants to take this country.

And this is going to be a close election, because people are still frustrated and a lot of folks are still hurting. And the other side happens to have these super-PACs that spend $500 million on negative ads and feed into people's anxieties and their frustrations.

But the good news is that those ideals I talked about at the beginning, that's what the American people believe in. They're not always paying attention to what's going on in Washington and it seems so negative and dysfunctional, a lot of times folks just tune it out. But when you offer them a choice, a vision that says we're all in this together and we're going to make investments so that every child can get an education, and we're going to rebuild America so we've got the kind of infrastructure and broadband lines and high-speed rail that will keep us an economic superpower, and we're going to invest in clean energy so that we further reduce our dependence on foreign oil, and we're going to do it in a balanced way, so we're asking those of us who have been most successful to do a little bit more so that other folks can come up behind us and succeed just like we did -- when you give them that choice, they know what the right answer is.

And so the key in 2012 is going to be how bad do we want it? Are we willing to fight for it, fight for that vision with even greater determination than we did in 2008?

And I told a story at the last event, I go back to my birthplace -- and I had a birth certificate for this --  -- and they make you feel bad.

This past winter, while I'd be working out, folks would come up to me and they would say, you know what, Mr. President, I just wanted to say how much I appreciate you repealing "don't ask, don't tell," because I'd been serving as a Marine for five years, for 10 years. There have been times where I haven't been able to have my partner see me off as I'm being deployed. And for you to acknowledge me not just as a soldier, but somebody who is a full citizen and equal participant in the life of this country really makes a difference.

And I was telling folks at the hotel that after about four of these, the last day, a young man came up -- and first, he pointed out that I wasn't doing the exercise right.  And then, he said, I want to thank you for repealing "don't ask, don't tell." And I was anticipating a similar story. And so I asked him, well, what kind of struggles have you been through being gay in uniform? He says, no, sir, I'm not gay. I want to thank you because I've had friends who were gay who were great Marines. And it always embarrassed me that somehow -- even though it didn't matter to any of us in the unit -- they had to pretend to be something they weren't. And this will make us better Marines and this will make us stronger as a country.

And that spirit is why I'm running for a second term, because I believe that's the essence of who we are as a country. That's what makes us special. That's what we're fighting for.

That's why I appreciate you guys being on board, because I want to finish what we started in 2008. All right, thanks. 

And for all those who performed tonight, I could not be more grateful and more appreciative. Many of you have put in a lot of time and effort, not just this time out but last time out. And it is just a great joy to be with all of you. But Margo especially -- I just want to give her a public acknowledgment because she has been a great friend. 

Before we get to the some of the more serious items, I do want to just share a quick story about Margo. Shortly after I had been elected -- Bill can relate to this -- the Secret Service bubble shrinks and it starts really clamping down.  -- but suddenly, not only have you lost your anonymity, but your capacity to just wander around and go into a bookstore, or go to a coffee shop, or walk through Central Park.

So I was saying -- it was a beautiful day and I had just been driving through Manhattan, and I saw Margo. And I said, you know, I just desperately want to take a walk through Central Park again, and just remember what that feels like. But the problem is, obviously, it's hard to do now. And so my idea has been to see if I was -- if I got a disguise -- 

And so Margo thought about it, and about a week later I got this fake moustache -- 

But I kept it. I have kept this moustache just in case in the second term I --  Going through the -- you know.

I want to thank Bill Clinton -  -- and to lay the groundwork for a sensible, thoughtful, common-sense, progressive agenda that is important to remember at this moment.

When many of us came together in 2008, we came together not just because of me. In fact, folks weren't sure whether I was going to win. When you support a guy named Barack Hussein Obama, the odds are always -- 

And in 2008, we understood that that compact seemed like it was eroded. A few people were doing very well, but more and more people seemed to be struggling to get by. We had squandered a surplus on tax cuts for folks who didn't need them and weren't even asking for them.  We had paid for two wars on a credit card. Because we hadn't enforced basic rules of the marketplace, we saw more and more of our economy built on speculation and financial schemes that were inherently unstable. And it all came crashing down in the worst crisis that we've seen in our lifetimes.

But part of the reason why we understood both what was possible and what had been lost was because of our memories of Bill Clinton's tenure as President --  -- and our recognition that there's no contradiction between growing an economy and making sure that everybody is taking part -- in fact, that's how you grow an economy, is because you're giving everybody a shot and everybody is doing their fair share, and everybody is playing by the same set of rules.

We understood there's no contradiction between economic growth and caring for our environment; that, in fact, if we make smart investments in clean energy, that's an entire industry of the future that can put people back to work.

We understood that there wasn't a contradiction between being fiscally responsible, but also making sure that kids got Head Start, kids could go to college, and we were investing in basic science and basic research. This wasn't some fantasy of ours. This wasn't some pie in the sky, wild imaginings. We'd seen it. We knew it was possible. And that's what we fought for.

Of course, we didn't know at the time that we were going to see this incredible crisis -- 3 million jobs lost in the six months before the election, and 800,000 lost the month I was sworn into office. But here's one thing we understood. The campaign taught us this -- the incredible resilience and the incredible strength of the American people. 

We made tough decisions to make sure that credit was flowing again to businesses large and small, and they could keep their doors open and start hiring again and make investments again in the future. And we've seen over 4 million jobs created. We've seen more manufacturing jobs created at any time since the 1990s.

And so, in part, the reason that we have been weathering this storm was because of some tough policies, but the right policies. But a lot of it just had to do with the resilience of the American people. They don't give up. They don't quit. So some 55-year-old gets laid off and they decide, you know what, I'm going to back to school. I'm going to get myself retrained to find the job of the future. I'm not giving up. A small business owner, they patch together whatever money they can to keep their doors open and to make sure that they can keep their employees on, even if it means maybe they don't get paid for a while, even if it means that the owner of that business is having to scrimp. That's how much they care about their employees.

Folks decided, you know what, we were going to retire at 65, but maybe we're going to have to work an extra five years because I'm going to make sure my child or my grandchild gets to go to college. All kinds of decisions like that made all across America.

And so after this incredible crisis, America is moving in the right direction. We're not there yet; we're not where we need to be. There are still too many people out there who are looking for work, too many homes that are still underwater, too many kids in poverty who still don't see prospects for the future. But we started to right the ship and we've moving in the direction that we imagined in 2008.

And that is why this election in a lot of ways is even more important than the last one, because as hard as we've worked over the last four years, as much as we've done to start rebuilding a country that's not built on how much we consume or some sort of Ponzi schemes, but built on what we're producing and what we're making, and the skills of our people, and the ingenuity of our scientists, and the risk-taking of our entrepreneurs -- after all that work that we've done, the last thing we're going to do is to go back to the very same policies that got us into this mess in the first place. We're not going backwards.  We're not going back.

 Not going back to a set of policies that say you're on your own. And that's essentially the theory of the other side. George Romney -- wrong guy.  Governor Romney is a -- he's a patriotic American. He's had great success in his life, and he's raised a beautiful family. But he has a theory of the economy that basically says, if I'm maximizing returns for my investors, for wealthy individuals like myself, then everybody is going to be better off.

He was in Iowa talking to a woman, and she was describing her financial struggles, and his response was out of an economic textbook. He said, "Productivity equals income." 

Now, I guess in the aggregate, technically -- right -- this is a coherent argument.  But the implication was somehow that this woman, or others who are struggling out there, they're not productive enough.

Well, let me tell you, actually, America has become incredibly productive. People are working harder than ever. We've got some of the most productive workers in the world. The problem is not that we aren't productive enough; the problem is that productivity has not translated for far too many people into higher incomes.  The problem is that profits haven't translated into jobs and investment in this country.

We believe in the marketplace. We believe in entrepreneurship and rewarding risk-taking. But what we also understand is that our economy works best, America became an economic superpower, because we created a platform where everybody could succeed. And we set up rules of the road that made the market work for everybody, and gave consumers confidence that they weren't going to be bilked, and gave investors confidence that if you're a small investor, you're not some insider, you still have a chance buying a stock.

And we understood that if we're investing in things like a Hoover Dam or DARPA -- the research and development arm of our military that ended up producing things like the Internet or GPS -- that that, in fact, would be good for everybody.

We understand that when my grandfather's generation came back from fighting in World War II and they had a chance to go to college on the GI Bill, that wasn't just good for one individual, it wasn't just good for one group. That was good for everybody. We all became richer together.

And that's the lesson that Mr. Romney and the Republicans in Congress don't seem to understand, they don't seem to get. But look at our history. Ironically, the first Republican President understood it. Abraham Lincoln understood it. That's why in the middle of a Civil War he was still building a Transcontinental Railroad and starting land grant colleges, and starting the National Academy of Sciences -- because he understood that ultimately there are some things we do better on our own -- not every government program works, not everybody can [be] helped who doesn't want to be helping themselves. All of us have responsibilities. And I learned early on that no matter how much money you pour into the schools, nothing replaces the love and attention and occasional scoldings from a parent.  I learned as a community organizer that no government program can substitute for the caring and passion of neighbors and communities. But I also understood, and you understand and Americans understand, that when we've done great things in this country we've done them together. We've done them together. And that's what's at stake in this election.

And we're not going back to this other theory. I'm not going to go back to a time when if you got sick, you had no recourse and you potentially could go bankrupt. I'm not going to go back to a time when 2.5 million young people can't get health insurance or can't stay on their parent's plan --  -- or 30 million people who are working maybe two jobs can't afford to buy health insurance and end up in an emergency room just because they can't get sick and aren't getting preventive care. We're not going to go back to that.

We're not going to go back to a time when -- we're not going to refight the battles about whether or not we need to make some basic reforms on Wall Street so that taxpayers don't have to bail out folks after they've made irresponsible or reckless bets.  That's not good for our financial markets. We're not going to refight that battle.

We're not going to go back to a time when manufacturing is all moving offshore. We want to bring companies onshore. I want to give tax breaks to companies that are investing in jobs investment here in the United States --  -- not shipping jobs overseas. We don't need to go back to policies like that.

We're not going to go back to a time when our military could expel somebody because of who they loved. We believe in everybody being treated fairly and equally, and respecting everybody's rights. We're not going to go backwards. We're going forwards. 

We don't need to go back to a foreign policy that thinks the measure of our security is everything we do we do on our own. We've been able to restore respect and collaboration, and our alliances have never been stronger -- partly because I've got a pretty good Secretary of State. 

And that's how we ended the war in Iraq. And that's how we're starting to transition out of Afghanistan. And that's how we brought Osama bin Laden to justice.  And we're not going to go backwards on policies that make America stronger.

We're not going to go back to the days when somehow women couldn't get the preventive care that they need. 

And we can afford the investments we need to grow. We can afford to make sure that every kid has a chance to go to college, and they're going to a decent school, and they're graduating. 

We can afford to rebuild our roads and our bridges and our airports and our broadband lines and high-speed rail, and putting people back to work. We can afford -- in fact, we can't afford not to invest in the science and research that's going to keep us at the cutting-edge. 

We're not going to throw millions of people off the Medicaid rolls, folks who are disabled or poor, seniors who are relying on it. We're not going to voucherize Medicare. We're going to responsibly reduce this deficit. You know -- two Presidents over the last 30 years that have actually reduced the pace of the growth in government spending happen to be on this stage right here. They happen to be the two Democrats. 

So we have to get our deficit and debt under control. We've got to do it in a responsible way, cut out programs we don't need. I've already signed a trillion dollars in cuts that have already been made, another trillion that are slated to be made. But we're also going to ask folks who can afford it like the two of us to pay a little bit more -- and some of you, too, so don't chuckle --  -- to pay a little bit more so that we can afford the things that will help us grow. That's the right recipe. That's what made us an economic superpower. And that's the policy that we're going to pursue.

Now, here's the good news. The American people, on the issues, when presented with the facts, they actually agree with us. Now, it's hard sometimes getting the facts out. There's a lot of bugs on the windshield. 

But when folks know the facts, when they're given a choice -- and that's what this election is about, every election is about a choice -- when given a choice between a vision that says we're going to have a balanced approach to deficit reduction, and we're going to continue to make investments in things like clean energy and fuel efficiency and science and innovation and education and rebuilding our infrastructure, versus another $5 trillion worth of tax cuts that would give the average millionaire and billionaire an additional $250,000 a year in tax breaks -- people agree with us.

On issue after issue, if you give them a fair presentation, no spin on the ball, the majority of the country -- not just Manhattan --  Just more of. More tax cuts for the wealthy. We're not just going to reduce regulation, we're going to cripple EPA. And people aren't buying that. They don't really think that that's going to work.

The only reason that this is going to be a close election is because people are still hurting. The situation in Europe is slowing things down. We've been prevented from, for example, the plans that I've put forward repeatedly to Congress to say, let's give states more help so they don't have to lay off more teachers. Now interest rates have never been lower. Literally, the government can -- basically people will pay us to lend us money -- 

But that's not something Congress, so far, has been willing to do. Though we're going to keep on putting pressure on them over these next few months because we don't have time just to wait for an election to do something. 

But folks are still hurting. And this has been a long slog for people. And sometimes when things are tough you just say, well, you know what, I'll just keep on trying something until something works. And that's compounded by $500 million in super-PAC negative ads that are going to be run over the course of the next five months that will try to feed on those fears and those anxieties and that frustration.

That's basically the argument the other side is making. They're not offering anything new, they're just saying, things are tough right now and it's Obama's fault. You can pretty much sum up their argument.  Nobody has really explained that to me.

So it's going to be -- it's going to be a tough election. But 2008 was tough, too. And what you all taught me was that when Americans are willing to come together and make a commitment to each other, when they have a vision about what's possible and they commit to it, and they join together and they work for it, when they decide -- when you decide -- that change is going to happen, guess what. Change happens.  Change happens.

And so I may be a little grayer than I was the last time I was on Broadway.  I'm more determined than I've ever been to finish what we started.

I used to say back in 2008, I'm not a perfect man, and haven't been and won't be a perfect President. Nobody is. But what I told you was I'd always tell you what I thought, I'd always tell you where I stood, and I'd wake up every single morning fighting as hard as I knew how to make life better for the American people. And I have kept that promise. I have kept that promise, Broadway.  I have kept that promise.

I still believe in you. I hope you still believe in me. I hope you still believe! If people ask you what this campaign is about, you tell them it's still about hope and it's still about change. And if you're willing to knock on some doors and make some phone calls, and talk to your friends and neighbors, and work just as hard as you did in 2008, we will finish what we started and remind the world why it is America is the greatest nation on Earth.

Thank you. God bless you. God bless America.

Well, listen, I'm here not just because I need your help -- although I do need your help.  I'll get to that in a second. But I'm here because your country needs your help.

Now, four years ago, we came together because we wanted to reclaim the basic bargain that had built the largest middle class and the most prosperous nation on Earth. We shared a belief that in America, your circumstances shouldn't be determined -- or your success shouldn't be determined by the circumstances of your birth, right?  And you can see that in Redwood City -- people from every background, from every corner not just of the country but of the world.

This represents that idea that if you're willing to work hard, you should be able to create a life for yourself and your family, find a good job. If you're willing to meet your responsibilities, you should be able to own a home and maybe start a business, strike out with a new idea, send your kids to a good school -- give them a chance to do even better than you, no matter who you are, no matter where you come from, no matter what you look like, no matter who you love. 

So that's why we did all this in 2008. This wasn't a commitment you made because of me. This was a commitment you made to each other, because you felt that the country had strayed from some of those basic values.

We watched a record surplus that was squandered on tax cuts for folks who didn't need them and weren't asking for them.  We saw two wars being waged on a credit card. We saw speculation in the financial sector, reaping huge profits for a few folks who were making bets with other people's money, but it was a flimsy kind of success. Manufacturing left our shores. A shrinking number of Americans did really, really well, but a growing number saw falling incomes and stagnant job growth and rising costs for everything from college to health care.

And so we had strayed from those values. And we built a house of cards, and it ended up collapsing in the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression -- lost three million jobs while we were campaigning; 800,000 jobs lost the month I took office.

And it's been tough. But it turns out the American people were tougher. 

Manufacturers are starting to invest in America again, adding jobs for the first time consistently since the '90s. Businesses got back to basics. Small business owners, entrepreneurs -- they hung on, made it work, kept on their employees where they could -- created over 4 million jobs in the last 26 months, more than 1 million in the last 6 months alone. 

Now, we're not satisfied.

You know, I've still got my day job, and so I'm -- 

And my opponent in this election, Governor Romney, he's a patriotic American. He's raised a wonderful family. He should be proud of the great personal success he's had.  But we also understand that it doesn't happen in a vacuum. It happens because of outstanding schools and universities. It happens because of a well-regulated financial market. It happens because we have extraordinary infrastructure. It happens for a whole host of reasons.

But Governor Romney doesn't seem to understand that. So when a woman in Iowa shared the story of her financial struggles, he sounded like he was talking out of a textbook. He said, well, our productivity equals our income. Well, the implication was the only reason that somebody might be in financial hardship is because they're not productive enough, they're not working hard enough.

But I have to tell you, those of us who have spent a lot of time talking to a lot of Americans have come to realize the problem isn't the American people aren't productive enough. Our productivity is actually higher than it's ever been. You've been working harder than ever. 

And so what Governor Romney and my opponents don't seem to understand is that a healthy economy doesn't just mean maximizing the profits of some. That's important. That's part of our free market, but not if it's purchased at the cost of massive layoffs; not if your main strategy is busting unions. You don't make America stronger just by shipping jobs and profits overseas. 

Of course, the fact is there's nothing new about these ideas. They've been peddling this stuff for years. Although, as Bill Clinton said a few weeks ago, this time their agenda is on steroids. But it's not new. They want bigger tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans. They want even deeper cuts for things like education and Medicare, and research and technology. They want to give banks and insurance companies even more power to do as they please, and gut and strip out regulations that help protect consumers.

But that's not new. That was tried, remember? The last guy did all this. 

I'll tell you what, I remember. You remember. We were there. And we're not going back to that.

We're moving this country forward.  So let's be clear. We don't expect government to solve all our problems. It shouldn't try. I learned from my mom there is no education policy that by itself can take the place of a parent's love and attention -- and sometimes a stern rebuke.

My first job as a community organizer was with Catholic churches who taught me the power of kindness and commitment to others in neighborhoods. 

I'm exaggerating.  But there is all kinds of reorganization and streamlining that has to be done, because we want government to have the same customer service mentality that the best businesses do. We want folks to have that same sense of efficiency and effectiveness.

But that's different from telling the vast majority of responsible, hardworking Americans, you're on your own; that unless you're lucky enough to have parents who can lend you the money, you may not be able to go to college --  -- that even if you pay your premiums every month, you're out of luck if an insurance company decides to drop your coverage when you need it most.

That's not who we are. That's not how America was built.  We built this country -- together. We built railroads and highways, the Hoover Dam and the Golden Gate Bridge

together. 

And we didn't do it for some particular group or individual. We understood that stuff made us all richer. It gave us all opportunity. We move forward together as one nation and as one people. And that's the true lesson of our past. That's the right vision for our future. That's why I'm running, again, for President of the United States. 

I'm running to make sure that by the end of this decade, more of our citizens hold college degrees than any other nation on Earth. I want more engineers. I want more scientists. I want our schools to be able to hire and reward the best teachers, especially in math and science. I want to give 2 million more Americans the chance to go to community colleges and learn the skills that local businesses need so that workers can compete in the 21st century. Higher education is not a luxury, it is a necessity of this new global economy and everybody should be able to afford it. Everybody should be able to get that chance. That's the choice in this election. That's why I'm running for President. 

I'm running to make sure the next generation of high-tech innovation takes place right here --  And that's the choice in this election.

I want to keep moving towards a future where we control our own energy. Our dependence on foreign oil is at its lowest point in 16 years. We have doubled clean energy investments. We have raised fuel-efficiency standards so the cars will be getting 55 miles a gallon.  Thousands of Americans have jobs because of the investments we're making in things like advanced battery manufacturing. That's our future.

And imagine what we could keep on doing if we weren't spending $4 billion a year on subsidies for the oil companies, and we were investing that in clean energy, we're investing it in energy efficiency.  It is time for us to end subsidies for a mature industry that's rarely been more profitable. Let's double down on the clean energy future that's never been more promising for our economy and for our security and for the safety of our planet and doing something about climate change.

We can make a difference. That's our future. That's our choice. And that's why I'm running for reelection -- because we still have more work to do. 

For the first time in nine years, we have no Americans fighting in Iraq. 

America is safer and stronger and more respected around the world because of the courage and selflessness of the U.S. armed forces, because of their outstanding service. 

And this is another place where my opponent has different ideas. He said ending the war was "tragic" -- in Iraq. He won't set a timeline for ending the war in Afghanistan. I have. And I intend to keep it. It's the right thing to do for our country --  -- because after a decade of war that's cost us thousands of lives and over a trillion dollars, the nation we need to build is our own.

We will end this war responsibly.  That's the choice in this election.